An Efﬁcient Algorithm for Frequent Closed Itemsets Mining
Lisheng Ma
Department of Computer Science and Technology
Chuzhou University
Chuzhou, Anhui, China
mls20041084@sina.comYi Qi
School of Computer
ChongQing University Of Arts And Sciences
Chongqing, China
qy0111@126.com
Abstract
Efﬁcient algorithms for mining frequent itemsets are crucial for
mining association rules. Most existing work focuses on mining all
frequent itemsets. However , since any subset of a frequent set also
is frequent, it is sufﬁcient to mine the set of frequent closed itemsets
which determines exactly the complete set of all frequent itemsets
and is usually much smaller than the laster . In this paper , we study
the performance of the existing approaches for mining frequent
closed itemsets. We also develop an algorithm, called FCFIA. In
this algorithm, we develop and integrate two techniques in order
to improve the efﬁciency of mining frequent closed itemsets. We
also present experimental results which show that our method out-
performs the existing methods FPclose.
Keywords: Data mining, Association Rules, Frequent Closed
Itemsets.
1. Introduction
Let I={i1,i2,...,i n}be a set of items , We call X⊆Ian
itemset, and we call Xak-itemset if the cardinality of itemset Xis
k. Let database Tbe a multiset of subsets of I, and let support (X)
be the percentage of itemset YinTsuch that X⊆Y. Informally,
the support of an itemset measures how often Xoccurs in the data-
base. If support (X)≥minSup , we say that Xis a frequent itemset,
and we denote the set of all frequent itemsets by FI. If Xis frequent
and none of the frequent superset of Xhave the same support, we
say that Xis a frequent closed itemset, and we denote the set of all
frequent closed itemsets by CFI.
There are basically two types of algorithms to mine frequent
itemsets, breadth-ﬁrst algorithms and depth-ﬁrst algorithms. The
breadth-ﬁrst algorithms, such as Apriori [1, 2] and its variants,
apply a bottom-up level-wise search in the itemset lattice. On the
other hand, depth-ﬁrst algorithms such as FP-growth [3] search
the lattice bottom-up in depth-ﬁrst way. From a singleton itemset
{i}, successively larger candidate sets are generated by adding one
element at a time.
The drawback of mining all frequent itemsets is that if there is
a large frequent itemset with size l, then almost all 2lcandidate
subsets of the itemset might be generated. However,The set of fre-
quent closed itemsets uniquely determines the exact frequency ofall itemsets, yet it can be orders of magnitude smaller than the set
of all frequent itemsets, it is sufﬁcient to discover only all frequent
closed itemsets.
Close [4] is an Apriori-like algorithm that directly mines fre-
quent closed itemsets. There are two main steps in Close. The ﬁrst
is to use bottom-up search to identify generators, the smallest fre-
quent itemset that determines a closed itemset.All generators are
found using a simple modiﬁcation of Apriori. After ﬁnding the
frequent sets at level k, Close compares the support of each set
with its subsets at the previous level. If the support of an itemset
matches the support of any of its subsets, the itemset cannot be a
generator and is thus pruned. The second step in Close is to com-
pute the closure of all the generators found in the ﬁrst step. To
compute the closure of an itemset we have to perform an intersec-
tion of all transactions where it occurs as a subset. The closures for
all generators can be computed in just one database scan, provided
all generators ﬁt in memory. Nevertheless computing closures this
way is an expensive operation.
G¨osta Grahne and Jianfei Zhu [8] introduces FPclose, which
an extension of the FP-growth method, for mining CFI only. Dur-
ing the mining process, an FP-tree (Frequent Pattern tree) is used
to store the frequency information of the whole dataset. To test
if a frequent itemset is closed, another structure, called a Closed
Frequent Itemset tree (CFI-tree), is utilised to keep track of all
frequent closed itemsets. This structure makes FPclose effectively
reduce the search time and the number of subset testing operations.
1.1. Contributions
In this paper we introduce FCFIA, an extension of the FP-
growth method, for mining CFI only. During the mining process,
an FP-tree(Frequent Pattern tree) is used to store the frequent in-
formation of the whole dataset. In this paper, we develop and in-
tegrate the following two techniques in order to improve the ef-
ﬁciency of mining frequent closed itemsets: 1 we use a strategy
like PEP in the algorithm MAFIA, the strategy not only reduce the
search space, but also reduce the size of FP-tree; 2 The CFI-tree
in the algorithm FPclose is used, which stores all frequent closed
itemsets, but we present a method of projection which can save
comparison times of items in closed checking.
Experimental results also show that FCFIA is competitive. For
datasets connect, it outperforms algorithms FPclose.
2008 International Conference on Computer Science and Software Engineering
978-0-7695-3336-0/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CSSE.2008.1042259




1.2. Overview
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a
brief introduction of the FP-tree and the FP-growth method of [3],
and then introduces the structure for storing CFI. In Section 3 we
give some optimization strategies. The FCFIA algorithm is also
give in this section. In Section 4 we compare our algorithm to the
algorithms FPclose, and we found our algorithm is valid in mining
frequent closed itemsets. Conclusions is given in Section 5.
NULL
f ,3f                    Conditional pattern base of p:
      c f m a: 2
  f b: 1NULL
c , 2
f , 2
m, 2
a , 2f , 1
b , 1c
f
m
a
b
pNULL
c , 4
f , 3
m, 3
a , 3
b , 1
p , 2f , 1
m , 1
b , 1b , 1
p , 1a c d f g i m p
a b c f l m o
b c h m o
b f k p s
a c e f l m n p
(a) (d) (c) (b)
Figure 1. FP-tree ( minSup =3)
2. Related theory
2.1. FP-tree and FP-growth method
In the aforementioned FP-growth method [3], a novel data
structure, the FP-tree (Frequent Pattern tree) is used. The FP-tree
is a compact data structure for storing all necessary information
about frequent itemsets in a database. Every branch of the FP-tree
represents a frequent itemset, and the nodes along the branch are
ordered decreasingly by the frequency of the corresponding item,
with leaves representing the least frequent items. Each node in the
FP-tree has three ﬁelds: item-name ,count and node -link,w h e n
item-name registers which item this node represents, count regis-
ters the number of transactions represented by the portion for the
path reaching this node, and node -linklinks to the next node in
the FP-tree carrying the same item-name , or null if there is none.
The FP-tree has a header table associated with it. Single items are
stored in the header table in decreasing order of frequency. Each
entry in the header table consists of two ﬁelds, item-name and head
ofnode -link(a pointer pointing to the ﬁrst node in the FP-tree car-
rying the item-name ).
Compared with Apriori and its variants which need several
database scans, the FP-growth method only needs two database
scans when mining all frequent itemsets. In the ﬁrst scan, all fre-
quent items are found. The second scan constructs the ﬁrst FP-tree
which contains all frequency information of the original dataset.
Mining the database then becomes mining the FP-tree. Figure 1 (a)
shows a database example. After the ﬁrst scan, all frequent items
are inserted into the hearder table of an initial FP-tree. Figure 1 (b)
shows the ﬁrst FP-tree constructed from the second scan. More de-
tails about the construction of FP-tree and FP-growth method can
be found in[3].
When add an item ito the existing itemset head , we denote
the itemset head∪ibyZ, the path from the parent node of this
Figure 2. CFI-tree ( minSup =3)
node (node’s item-name isi) to the root node in the head ’s FP-
tree is called Z’s preﬁx path. Figure 1(d) shows the preﬁx paths
for item {p}.
2.2. CFI-tree
In algorithm FPclose introduces the Closed Frequent Itemset
tree (CFI-tree) as the special data structure to store CFI. The CFI-
tree resembles an FP-tree. It has a root labelled with ”root”. Chil-
dren of the root are item preﬁx subtrees. Each node in the subtree
has four ﬁelds: item-name ,count ,node -level and node -link.A l l
nodes with same item-name are linked together. The node -link
points to the next node with same item-name . A header table is
constructed for items in the CFI-tree, the item order in the table is
same as the item order in the ﬁrst FP-tree constructed from the ﬁrst
scan of the database. Each entry in the header table consists of two
ﬁelds: item-name and head of a node -link.T h e node -linkpoints to
the ﬁrst node with the same item-name in the CFI-tree.Here, level
is still used for subset testing. The count ﬁeld is needed because
when comparing Ywith a set Zin the tree, we are trying to verify
that it is not the case that Y⊂Zand Yand Zhave the same count.
In FPclose, a newly discovered frequent itemset is inserted into the
CFI-tree, unless it is a subset of an itemset and they have the same
count already in the tree. Figure 2 shows the CFI-tree from the
database in ﬁgure 1(a) when minSup equal 3. In Figure 2, a node
x,c,lmeans that the node is for item x, that its count is cand that
its level is l. Due to the lack of space, we omit the algorithm for
constructing CFI-tree here.
3. Mining CFI by FCFIA
3.1. Pruning Strategy
Lethead be an itemset. One method of optimization involves
comparing the support of set of items head and head∪i(i∈head ’s
conditional pattern base). If support (head )a n d support (head∪i)
are equivalence, then any transaction containng head also contains
i. This guarantees that any frequent itemset Zcontaining head but
not ihas the frequent superset Z∪i, and they have the same
count. According the deﬁne of the frequent closed itemset, it is not
necessary to count itemsets containing head and not i, Therefore,
260



we can move item itohead . At the same time, We can also remove
item ifrom the head ’s conditional pattern base which contain item
i.
Another method of optimization involves comparing the sup-
port of set of items head∪iand Z∪i(Zcontaining items head -j,j
recently add to head ).If support( head∪i) and support( Z∪i)a r e
equivalence, This guarantees that any frequent itemset Z∪ihas the
frequent superset head∪i, they have the same count. According
the deﬁne of the frequent closed itemset, we can stop the branch
search which containing the itemsets Z∪i. (see Pseudocode: Prun-
ingStrategy )
Pseudocode: Pruning Strategy (Current itemset: head ){
for each item iinhead ’s conditional pattern base
{NewItems =head ∪i
if (support (NewItems )= = support (head ))
{Move itohead
Remove ifrom head ’s conditional pattern base }
NewItems =head ∪i
if (support (NewItems )= = support (Z∪i)
Stop the branch search that containing the itemset Z∪i
}
}
3.2. Projection Strategy
In the algorithm FPclose, a new structure is used to store fre-
quent closed itemsets, called CFI-tree, which can save compari-
son times of items in closed checking. But we ﬁnd it also have
some redundancy comparisons in subset cheching using CFI-tree,
we developed a method of projection can save more comparison
times in closed cheching.
LetCFIP [h] be a set of the node of CFI-tree.We denote all sets
ofCFIP [h](h≤|head|)byCFIPs .T h es e t CFIP [1] is initialized
as all these nodes in the CFI-tree which contain the ﬁrst item in
head .S o r t head in support-ascending order.
When a new frequent closed itemset insert into the CFI-tree,
for the path which contains the new frequent closed itemset in the
CFI-tree, for every node from the leaf node to the root node in this
path, if node’s item-name isi,iis the hth element in head and the
node is not an element in the set CFIP [h], add the node to the set
CFIP [h]. If node’s item-name isi,iis the hth element in head and
the node is an element in the set CFIP [h] , then stop updating the
setCFIPs .( see Procedure 1)
When add a new item itohead , for every node Pin the set
CFIP [h], (iis the h+1th item in head ), if P’s preﬁx path contains
the item iand node Q(Q.item-name isi)i nt h e P’s preﬁx path
is not in the set CFIP [h+1], add Qto the set CFIP [h+1]. ( see
Procedure 2)
Procedure 1 Update CFIPs (leaf,CFIPs )
Input: Leaf node of CFI-tree; Projection set CFIPs
Output: After updating projection set CFIPs
(1)Q=leaf ; h=1;
(2) while ( Qis not root AND h≤|CFIPs |){
(3) if ( Q.item-name is the hth item in head and Qis not
inCFIP [h]){
(4) Add QtoCFIP [h];h++;
(5) Q=Q.parent }
(6) else if ( Q.item-name is the hth item in head and Q
is in CFIP [h])
(7) Return CFIPs }
(8) Return CFIPs
Procedure 2 CFIPs Projection (x,CFIP [h])
Input: A new item x(xis the h+1th item in head );
Projection set CFIP [h]
Output: New projection set CFIP [h+1]
(1) if ( h+1<|head|){(2) for( i=|head|;i>h+1;i-- )
(3) CFIP [i]=CFIP [i-1]}
(4)CFIP [h+1] is null
(5) for each node PinCFIP [h]{
(6) if ( P’s preﬁx path contains the item xand node Q
(Q.item-name isx) in the P’preﬁx path is not in the set
CFIP [h+1])
(7) Add QtoCFIP [h+1]}
(8) Return CFIP [h+1]
3.3. FCFIA: Mining CFI
We extend the FP-growth method and get algorithm FCFIA de-
scribed in Procedure 3. Like FP-growth, algorithm FCFIA is also
recursive. In the initial call, an FP-tree is constructed from the
ﬁrst scan of the database. A linked list head contains the items
that form the conditional pattern base of the current call. If there
is only one single path in the FP-tree, every frequent itemset X
generated from this single path together with head is an frequent
itemset, then we check if itemset head∪Xis a frequent closed
itemset. In line 5, if itemset head∪Xis a frequent closed itemset,
we insert head∪Xinto the CFI-tree and update the set CFIPs
using the path of containing the itemset head ∪Xin the CFI-
tree. If the FP-tree is not a single path tree, then for each item in
the header-table, the item is appended to head , line 9 calls func-
tion CFIPs Projection, and line 10 calls function closed checking
to check if itemset head is a frequent closed itemsets. if itemset
head is a frequent closed itemset, we insert head into the CFI-tree
and update the set CFIPs using the path of containing the itemset
head in the CFI-tree. In line 13 Construct the head ’s FP-tree, then
call function Pruning strategy( head ), FCFIA will be called recur-
sively. Function closed checking will be explained shortly. Sort
head in support-ascending order in the Procedure 3.
Procedure 3 FCFIA (T)
Input: T: FP-tree
Global:
CFI-tree: CFI-tree
head : a linked list of items
CFIPs : projection set
Output: The CFI-tree which contains CFI
Method:
(1) if Tonly contains a single path P{
(2) Generate all frequent itemset from T
(3) for each Xin frequent itemset
(4) if not closed checking( head ∪X){
(5) Insert Xinto CFI-tree
(6) Update MFIPs }
}
(7) else for each iin Header-table of T{
(8) Append itohead
(9) CFIPs Projection( i,CFIP [h])
(10) if not closed checking( head )
(11) {Insert head into CFI-tree
(12) Update MFIPs }
(13) Construct the head ’s FP-tree Thead
(14) Pruning strategy( head )
(15) FCFIA (Thead )
(16) Remove ifrom head}
3.4. Closed Checking
In FPclose, the implementation of function closed checking is
following. By using the header-table in the CFI-tree, a set Sis not
necessarily compared with CFI in the CFI-tree. First, Sis sorted
according to the order of items in header table of CFI-tree. Sup-
pose the sorted Sis{i1,i2,...,i m}. From the header table, we
261



ﬁnd the node list for im. For each node in the list,we check if its
count is equal to or greater than S. If it is, we then test if Sis a
subset of the ancestors of that node.
However, in the new algorithm, we can do better by using the
method of projection, First, head is sorted according to the order
of items in header table of CFI-tree. Suppose the sorted head is
{i1,i2,...,i m}. For each node in the set MFIP [h] (The hth item
is recently added to head ), we check if its count is equal to the
support of head . If it is, we then test if head is a subset of the
ancestors of that node. If {i1,i2,...,i m}is not a subset of the
ancestors of every node in the set MFIP [h] and they are have same
count , the function closed checking returns false and shows the
itemset head is a frequent closed itemset. If {i1,i2,...,i m}is a
subset of the ancestors of a node in the set MFIP [h] and they are
have same count, function subset checking returns true and shows
the itemset head is not a frequent closed itemset.
4. Experimental Results
The experiments were conducted on a 1.62Ghz AMD
Athlon(tm) 64 X2 with 1GB of memory running Microsoft Win-
dows XP Professional. All code was compiled using Microsoft
Visual C++ 6.0.
We tested two algorithms FPclosed and FCFIA on dataset: con-
nect . In general, at the higher supports, the pattern length varies
between 5-12 items, while at lower supports the patterns contain
over 20 items.
Figure 3. dataset connect
Figure 3 illustrate the running time results of comparing FC-
FIA to FPclose. We can see our method outperforms the method
FPclose on the datasets connect. The x-axis is the user-speciﬁed
minimum support, while the y-axis is the algorithms running time.
Figure 4 illustrate the percentage results tested on dataset con-
nect . The percentage deﬁned as (the sum of all node in the FP-tree
constructed with FP-tree pruning strategy in the algorithm) /( the
sum of all node in the FP-tree constructed without FP-tree pruning
strategy in the algorithm)
We can see our method can efﬁciently reduce the size of FP-
tree ( The x-axis is the user-speciﬁed minimum support, while the
y-axis is percentage)
Figure 4. percentage
5. Conclusions
We presented FCFIA, an algorithm for ﬁnding frequent closed
itemsets. Our experimental results demonstrate that FCFIA con-
sistently outperforms FPclose. In the algorithm FCFIA, the prun-
ing strategy and projection strategy were quite beneﬁcial in reduc-
ing the search space, the size of FP-tree and saving comparison
times of items.
References
[1] R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski and A. Swami. Mining association
rules between sets of items in large databases. In Proceed-
ing of Special Interest Group on Management of Data, 1993,
pages 207-216.
[2] R. Agrawal and R. Srikant. Fast algorithms for mining as-
sociation rules. In Proceeding of Int. Conf. Very Large Data
Bases. Santiago, Chile, Sept. 1994, pages 487-499.
[3] J. Han, J. Pei and Y . Yin. Mining frequent patterns with-
out candidate generation. In Proceeding of Special Inter-
est Group on Management of Data, Dallas, TX, May 2000,
pages 1-12.
[4] N. Pasquier, Y . Bastide, R. Taouil, and L. Lakhal. Discover-
ing frequent closed itemsets for association rules. In 7th Intl.
Conf. on Database Theory, January 1999,pages 398-416.
[5] J. Pei, J. Han, and R. Mao. Closet: An efﬁcient algorithm for
mining frequent closed itemsets. In SIGMOD Intl Workshop
on Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, May 2000,pages
21-30.
[6] Y . Bastide, R. Taouil, N. Pasquier, G. Stumme, and L.
Lakhal. Mining frequent patterns with counting inference.
SIGKDD Explorations, 2(2), December 2000, pages 66-75.
[7] Zaki MJ, Hsiao CJ. CHARM: An efﬁcient algorithm for
closed itemset mining. In: Grossman R, et al, eds. Proc. of
the 2nd SIAM Intl. Conf. on Data Mining. Arlington: SIAM,
2002. 12 28.
[8] Grahne G, Zhu J F. Fast Algorithm for Frequent Itemset Min-
ing Using FP-Trees[J]. IEEE Trans.on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 2005, 17(10): 1347-1362.
262