Frontiers of Computer Science CN 10-1014/TP
DOI 10.1007/s11704-016-6245-4 ISSN 2095-2228
RESEARCH ARTICLE
CLS-Miner: efficient and effective closed high utility
itemset mining
Thu-Lan DAM1,6, Kenli LI1,2,3, Philippe FOURNIER-VIGER4, Quang-Huy DUONG5
1 College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha
410082, China
2 CIC of HPC, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
3 National Supercomputing Center in Changsha, Changsha , Hunan, 410082, China
4 School of Natural Sciences and Humanities, Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen
Graduate School, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518055, China
5 Faculty of Information Technology, Mathematics and Electrical Engineering, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, Norway
6 Faculty of Information Technology, Hanoi University of Industry, Hanoi, Vietnam
Front. Comput. Sci., Just Accepted Manuscript • 10.1007/s11704-016-6245-4
http://journal.hep.com.cn on November 29, 2016
© Higher Education Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016
Just Accepted
This is a Just Accepted manuscript, which has been examined by the peer-review process and
“ ”
has been accepted for publication. A Just Accepted manuscript is published online shortly
“ ”
after its acceptance, which is prior to technical editing and formatting and author proofing.
Higher Education Press (HEP) provides Just Accepted as an optional and free service which
“ ”
allows authors to make their results available to the research community as soon as possible
after acceptance. After a manuscript has been technically edited and formatted, it will be
removed from the Just Accepted Web site and published as an Online First article. Please note
“ ”
that technical editing may introduce minor changes to the manuscript text and/or graphics which
may affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. In no event
shall HEP be held responsible for errors or consequences arising from the use of any information
contained in these Just Accepted manuscripts. To cite this manuscript please use its Digital
“ ”
Object Identifier (DOI(r)), which is identical for all formats of publication.
”
Front.Comput.Sci.
DOI
RESEARCHARTICLE
ffi ff
CLS-Miner: e cient and e ective closed high utility itemset mining
Thu-LanDAM1,6,KenliLI 1,2,3,PhilippeFOURNIER-VIGER4,Quang-HuyDUONG5
1 CollegeofComputerScienceandElectronicEngineering,HunanUniversity,Changsha410082,China
2 CICofHPC,NationalUniversityofDefenseTechnology,Changsha410073,China
3 NationalSupercomputingCenterinChangsha,Changsha,Hunan,410082,China
4 SchoolofNaturalSciencesandHumanities,HarbinInstituteofTechnologyShenzhenGraduateSchool,Shenzhen,
Guangdong,518055,China
5 FacultyofInformationTechnology,MathematicsandElectricalEngineering,NorwegianUniversityofScienceand
Technology,Norway
6 FacultyofInformationTechnology,HanoiUniversityofIndustry,Hanoi,Vietnam
(cid:13)c HigherEducationPressandSpringer-VerlagBerlinHeidelberg2016
Abstract Highutilityitemsetmining(HUIM)isapopular novelstrategies,extensiveexperimentshavebeenconducted
dataminingtask, havingapplicationsinnumerousdomains. on six benchmark datasets having various characteristics.
However,traditionalHUIMalgorithmsoftenproduceavery
Resultsshowthattheproposedstrategiesarehighlyefficient
large set of high utility itemsets (HUIs). As a result, and effective, that the proposed CLS-Miner algorithm
analyzing HUIs can be very time-consuming for users. outperforms the current state-of-the-art CHUD and
Moreover,alargesetofHUIsalsomakesHUIMalgorithms CHUI-Miner algorithms, and that CLS-Miner scales
less efficient in terms of execution time and memory linearly.
consumption. To address this problem, it was recently Keywords Utility mining, High utility itemset mining,
proposedtodiscoverclosedhighutilityitemsets(CHUIs),a Closeditemsetmining,Closedhighutilityitemsetmining.
concise and lossless representation of all HUIs. Although
mining CHUIs is useful and desirable, it remains a very
computationally expensive task. The reason is that current
1 Introduction
algorithms often generate a huge number of candidate
itemsets, and are unable to prune the search space Frequent itemset mining (FIM) [1] is a popular knowledge
effectively. In this paper, we address these issues by discovery task. The goal of frequent itemset mining is to
proposing a novel algorithm named CLS-Miner. The find all frequent itemsets in a transaction database. A
proposed algorithm utilizes the utility-list structure to frequent itemset is a set of items that appears in at least
directly compute the utilities of itemsets without producing minsuptransactions,whereminsupisaparametersetbythe
candidates. Italsointroducesthreenovelstrategiestoreduce user. FIMhasbeenthesubjectofmanystudies,andremains
the search space, named chain-estimated utility to this day a very active research area [2–7]. However, it
co-occurrence pruning, lower branch pruning, and pruning assumes that all items in a database are equally important
by coverage. Moreover, an effective method for checking if (e.g. intermsofprofit,importance,orweight)andthatitems
an itemset is a subset of another itemset is introduced to may not appear more than once in each transaction. But
further reduce the time required for discovering CHUIs. To theseassumptionsoftendonotholdinreallife. Inpractice,
evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm and its retailers may be more interested in finding the itemsets that
yield a high profit than in discovering the itemsets that
Receivedmonthdd,yyyy;acceptedmonthdd,yyyy
appear frequently. To address these limitations, the task of
E-mail:lkl@hnu.edu.cn FIM has been redefined as the task of high utility itemset
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
2
mining(HUIM).InHUIM,itemscanappearmorethanonce reasons, it remains a computationally difficult task, and it is
in each transaction and a weight is assigned to each item to challenging to designa CHUI mining algorithm thatis both
indicate its relative importance to the user (e.g. in terms of efficient in terms of runtime and memory usage [20]. To
unitprofit). ThegoalofHUIMistodiscoverallhighutility design an efficient CHUI mining (CHUIM) algorithm, one
itemsets (HUIs) in a transaction database. A set of items is mustcorrectlyincorporatetechniquesfromclosedFIMwith
said to be a high utility itemset if its utility (e.g. the profit techniques used in HUIM, to reduce the search space
thatityieldsinadatabase)isnotlessthanaminimumutility effectively, while ensuring that no CHUIs are missed.
thresholdminutilsetbytheuser. CHUD[20]isthefirstCHUIminingalgorithm. However,a
Inrecentyears,HUIM[8–13]hasbecomeaverypopular major limitation of CHUD is that it is a two-phase
research area, since it has many applications in several algorithm, which can generate a large number of
domains such as cross-marketing, click stream analysis and candidates1)andrepeatedlyscansthedatabase.
biomedicine [9,10,14–17]. HUIM is widely recognized as To address this limitation of two-phase algorithms,
more difficult than FIM because the powerful downward one-phase algorithms have been recently proposed and
closurepropertyusedtoprunethesearchspaceinFIMdoes shown to outperform previous two-phase HUIM
notholdinHUIM.Thislatterpropertystatesthatthesupport algorithms [9,11,24,25]. Those algorithms employ a novel
of an itemset is anti-monotonic, i.e. supersets of an structure called utility-list [9,11]. Using this structure, the
infrequent itemset are infrequent and subsets of a frequent utility of an itemset can be quickly calculated without
itemset are frequent. However, in HUIM, a high utility scanning the original database by making join operations
itemset may have supersets and subsets having lower, equal with utility-lists of smaller itemsets. Inspired by these
or higher utilities. Thus, techniques to prune the search algorithms, a one-phase algorithm called CHUI-Miner
spacedevelopedinFIMcannotbedirectlyusedforHUIM. (Closed+ High Utility Itemset mining) [26] has been
Many efficient HUIM algorithms have been recently proposed for CHUI mining. It employs a structure
proposed [8–13,18,19]. To prune the search space, these named EU-List (Extended Utility-List) to maintain
algorithms utilize measures that overestimate the utility of information about the utilities of itemsets in transactions.
itemsets and are monotonic [8, 10]. Even though these Furthermore,itadoptsadivide-and-conquermethodologyto
algorithmshavemanyapplications,amajordrawbackisthat efficiently mine the complete set of CHUIs. However, even
the set of HUIs can be very large, depending on how the with the improvements introduced in CHUI-Miner, the task
minimum utility parameter is set by the user. In general, of CHUIM remains computationally expensive for the
whenaHUIMalgorithmgeneratesmoreHUIs,itsexecution followingreasons.
time and memory consumption also greatly increase.
(1) First,althoughCHUI-Miner[26]discoversCHUIsusing
Furthermore,analyzingalargenumberofHUIsproducedby
a single phase and does not generate candidates as per
aHUIMalgorithmisadifficultandtime-consumingtaskfor
the definition of the two-phase model, CHUI-Miner
users.
explores the search space by generating itemsets, and a
To address this issue, a compact and lossless
costly join operation has to be repeatedly performed to
representation of HUIs, named closed HUIs (CHUIs) [20]
evaluatetheutilityofeachitemset. Thus, itisdesirable
wasproposed. Thisrepresentationisinspiredbytheconcept to design more efficient pruning strategies that could
ofclosedpatterns[5,21–23], whichwasintroducedinFIM.
reduce the number of utility-list joins that are
An itemset is said to be a CHUI if (1) its utility is not less
performed.
thanaminimumutilitythresholdspecifiedbytheuser,andif
(2) Second,CHUI-Miner[26]prunesthesearchspaceusing
(2) it has no supersets appearing in the same
two upper-bounds on the utilities of itemsets called the
transactions[20]. ThesetofCHUIsisinterestingbecauseit
TWU [8] and the remaining utility [9]. An important
canbeseveralordersofmagnitudesmallerthanthesetofall
limitation of using the TWU upper-bound is that it is
HUIs, and it allows deriving all HUIs without scanning the
database (it is lossless). Moreover, CHUIs also provide 1)Itisimportanttonotethatthetermcandidatehasdifferentmeaningsin
HUIMandFIM.InFIM,analgorithmissaidtonotgeneratecandidatesifit
meaningful information to decision-makers since they are
onlyconsiderspatternsthatexistinadatabase[3,4].InHUIM,analgorithm
the largest HUIs that are common to groups of issaidtonotgeneratecandidatesifitdoesnotminehigh-utilityitemsetsin
twophases, i.e. byfirstidentifyingasetofpotentialhighutilityitemsets
customers[20].
usingoverestimations,andthencalculatingtheirexactutilitiesbyscanning
Although mining CHUIs is desirable for the above thedatabase.
Front.Comput.Sci.
3
loose, and thus numerous candidates need to be pre-checkmethodiseffectiveandcangreatlyreducethe
consideredtofindthefinalsetofCHUIs. runtimeofthesetwooperations.
(3) Third, a drawback of the search space pruning strategy (3) A novel algorithm named CLS-Miner is proposed to
based on the remaining utility upper-bound used by efficiently mine CHUIs. The CLS-Miner algorithm
CHUI-Miner is that it can only be applied to an itemset utilizes the utility-list structure and integrates the three
afteritsutility-listhasbeenfullyconstructed. However, proposed pruning strategies and the fast pre-check
constructing a utility-list is an expensive method.
operation [9,11]. To improve the efficiency of CHUI (4) An extensive performance evaluation of the proposed
mining, it is thus desirable to design pruning strategies algorithmanditsstrategiesisdoneonbothreal-lifeand
that can be applied during or before utility-list synthetic datasets. The performance of CLS-Miner is
construction. compared with the performance of the state-of-the-art
(4) Fourth, efficient techniques must be designed to avoid CHUD and CHUI-Miner algorithms for CHUIM.
consideringasmanynoncloseditemsetsaspossible. In Results show that the proposed strategies are effective
particular, two key operations for closed pattern mining for reducing the search space, and that the CLS-Miner
are subsumption checks and closure algorithm is highly efficient. The proposed algorithm
computations [5,22,23]. Those operations need to be alsohasexcellentscalability.
implementedefficiently.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
To address the need for a more efficient CHUIM reviews studies related to HUI and CHUI mining.
algorithm, this paper proposes a novel algorithm named Preliminaries and the problem definition are introduced in
CLS-Miner. Thisalgorithmintroducesseveralnovelideasto Section 3. Section 4 presents the three novel strategies and
discoverclosedhighutilityitemsetsefficientlybyaddressing pre-check method. Section 5 presents the CLS-Miner
the four above limitations. The main contributions of this algorithm, and gives a detailed example illustrating how the
workaresummarizedasfollows. algorithm is applied. Experimental results are reported in
Section6. Finally, aconclusionisdrawnandfutureworkis
(1) Three efficient strategies for pruning the search space
discussedinSection7.
are proposed. The first strategy is named
Chain-Estimated Utility Co-occurrence Pruning
(Chain-EUCP). It uses the estimated utility of item
2 Relatedwork
co-occurrences to determine if an itemset and its
extensions should be pruned. The second strategy is
This paper presents a new algorithm for closed high utility
named Lower Branch Pruning (LBP). This strategy
itemset mining. Thus, this section briefly reviews studies
reduces the search space using a novel upper-bound on
related to high utility itemset mining and closed high utility
theutilitiesoftransitiveextensionsofanitemset. These
itemsetmining.
twostrategiesalloweliminatingcandidateswithoutfully
constructingtheirutility-lists. Thelaststrategyisbased
2.1 Highutilityitemsetmining
onanewconceptcalledCoverage, whichisinspiredby
the definition of a closed itemset. The Coverage can be In real-life, customer transactions generally contain
used to prune low utility itemsets and also to quickly information about the purchase quantities of items, and
calculate the closure of itemsets. The three proposed itemsmayhavedifferentunitprofits. Traditionalalgorithms
pruningstrategiescangreatlyreducethenumberofjoin for frequent itemset mining ignore this information. To
operationsforconstructingutility-lists,andthusprunea addressthislimitation,thetaskofhighutilityitemsetmining
largepartofthesearchspace. (HUIM) was proposed [27]. In HUIM, the utility of an
(2) An efficient pre-check containing method for checking itemsetmaybeequal,lessthan,orgreaterthantheutilityof
whether an itemset X contains another itemset Y is also anyofitssubsets. Thus, ifanalgorithmprunessupersetsof
proposed. This method is used to perform subsumption low utility itemsets to reduce the search space, it may
checksandclosurecomputations. Thesetwooperations produce an incomplete set of high utility itemsets. To
are essential in closed pattern mining. As shown in the address this issue, the TWU measure [8] was introduced. It
experimental evaluation section of this paper, the novel isanupper-boundontheutilityofitemsets,andrestoresthe
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
4
downward closure property. According to the TWU model, the runtimes of HUIM algorithms become longer and more
all supersets of an itemset having a TWU lower than the memoryisconsumed[20].
minimumutilitythresholdalsohaveaTWUlowerthanthat In FIM, a popular solution to this problem is to discover
threshold. However,adisadvantageofusingtheTWUisthat concise representations of patterns, which are small sets of
itisalooseupperboundontheutilityofitemsetsandthusa patterns that summarize all other patterns by eliminating
hugenumberofcandidatesstillneedtobeconsideredtofind redundant itemsets (itemsets that can be derived from the
thefinalsetofHUIs. otheritemsets). Forexample,severalconciserepresentations
Numerous HUIM algorithms discover high utility of frequent itemsets have been proposed such as closed
itemsets in two phases using the TWU model such as itemsets [21,22], maximal itemsets [29,30], and generator
Two-Phase[8], UP-GrowthandUP-Growth+[10], PB[28], itemsets[31]. Itwasdemonstratedthattheserepresentations
and BAHUI [12]. These algorithms first generate a set of can be orders of magnitude smaller than the set of all
candidate high utility itemsets by overestimating their frequent patterns, thus providing more concise information
utilities using the TWU measure (phase 1). Then, these to users. Moreover, it was shown that mining these
algorithms perform additional database scans to calculate representations is often faster than discovering all frequent
the exact utilities of candidates and keep only those that are itemsets.
high utility itemsets (phase 2). Despite having introduced To obtain similar benefits in HUIM, researchers have
new techniques to discover high utility itemsets, an developed concise representations of HUIs [20,26,32,33].
importantdrawbackoftwo-phasealgorithmsisthattheycan Designing a concise representation of HUIs is more
generateahugenumberofcandidatesbecausetheTWUisa challenging than developing a concise representation of
looseupper-boundontheutilityofitemsets. frequentitemsetsastheutilitymeasureisneithermonotonic
Recently, algorithms have been proposed to mine HUIs nor anti-monotonic [20]. Thus, concise representations in
usingasinglephasetoavoidmaintainingalargenumberof FIM need to be adapted to the context of HUIM, and novel
candidates in memory before calculating their exact utility. techniques need to be designed to efficiently discover these
The HUI-Miner algorithm [9] introduced a new data representations in databases. Three main concise
structurecalledutility-listtomaintaininformationaboutthe representations of HUIs have been proposed, which have
utilities of itemsets in transactions. Once HUI-Miner has different characteristics and provide different information to
constructed the utility-list of each single item, it can create users.
theutility-listofanylargeritemsetbyjoiningtheutility-lists • AmaximalHUI[33]isaHUIthathasnosupersetsthat
of some of its subsets, without scanning the database.
areHUIs.TherepresentationofmaximalHUIsprovides
HUI-Miner can find all HUIs and their exact utilities using
thebenefitofbeingaverycompactrepresentationofall
the utility-list structure. HUI-Miner [9] was shown to
HUIs. However,ithasthedrawbackofbeinglossy,i.e.
outperform previous algorithms. However, HUI-Miner still
alargeamountofinformationaboutHUIscanbelost.
has to perform a costly join operation to obtain the • A generator of HUI [32] is the smallest set of items
utility-listofeachitemsetgeneratedbyitssearchprocedure.
common to a group of customers that have bought a
To reduce the number of join operations, the FHM
HUI.TherepresentationofgeneratorsofHUIsisuseful
algorithm[11]wasintroduced. Itintegratesanovelstrategy
to discover small sets of items that characterize groups
forpruningthesearchspaceusinginformationaboutitemset
ofcustomers. However,itisalsolossy.
co-occurrences. It was shown that this strategy can greatly • A closed+ HUI (CHUI) [20,26] is a HUI that has no
reducethenumberofjoinoperations,andthatFHM[11]can
supersets having the same support. The advantages of
beuptosixtimesfasterthanHUI-Miner.
CHUIs are that it is very compact and lossless (unlike
the two previous representations). Thus, information
2.2 Closedhighutilityitemsetmining about every other HUIs can be recovered from this
representationwithoutscanningthedatabase.
Although the discovery of HUIs is useful and has many
applications, a drawback of traditional HUIM algorithms is Inthispaper,weareinterestedinclosed+HUIssinceitis
thattheycanproduceahugenumberofpatterns. Forusers, the most popular concise representation of HUIs, and it is
analyzing a huge number of patterns can be difficult and lossless. The first proposed algorithm for mining CHUIs is
time-consuming. Moreover,asmorepatternsarediscovered, CHUD(Closed+ HighUtilityitemsetDiscovery)[20]. Itisa
Front.Comput.Sci.
5
depth-first search algorithm that extends the (RML),andDiscardingCandidateshavingamaximumitem
DCI-Closed [22] algorithm, which is one of the fastest utility that is less than the minimum utility threshold
algorithms for mining frequent closed itemsets. (DCM). Although CHUD introduces a novel tree structure
DCI-Closed [22] utilizes a bitwise vertical representation of and several candidate pruning strategies, it inherits the
the database. Moreover, it adopts a divide-and-conquer limitations of two-phase algorithms. This considerably
approachandvisitsitemsetsinthesearchspaceinaspecific degrades its performance both in terms of runtime and
order by traversing generator itemsets to reach closed memoryconsumption.
itemsets. Furthermore, DCI-Closed integrates an efficient
mechanism to detect duplicate closed itemsets without
maintaining previously found closed itemsets in main Recently,aone-phasealgorithmnamedCHUI-Miner[26]
memory. was proposed for mining closed high utility itemsets more
CHUD[20]isatwo-phasealgorithm. Inthefirstphase,it efficiently. CHUI-Miner integrates techniques from closed
applies a modified DCI-Closed procedure to discover itemset mining [21,22] to only discover closed patterns. It
candidate CHUIs. During this process, CHUD applies utilizes an EU-List structure to store information about the
several effective strategies for reducing the number of utilityofitemsetsandadoptsadivide-and-conquerapproach
candidates generated based on properties of the utility tomineCHUIswithoutproducingcandidates. CHUI-Miner
measure. Similar to the DCI-Closed algorithm, CHUD isthefirstone-phasealgorithmforminingCHUIs. However,
utilizes the Itemset-Tidset pair Tree(IT-Tree) structure [22] CHUI-Miner only prunes the search space using the
to explore the search space of itemsets. In an IT-Tree, each TWU [8] and the remaining utility upper-bounds [9]. As a
node N(X) contains an itemset X, its Tid set Tidset(X), and result, CHUI-Miner can still consider a huge number of
two lists of items named PreSet(X) and PostSet(X). The itemsets from the search space. Moreover, CHUI-Miner
CHUD algorithm recursively explores the IT-Tree and stops repeatedly applies a EU-list construction operation that is
when all candidate CHUIs have been found. A key verycostly.
differencebetweenDCI-ClosedandCHUD,isthatthislatter
storesanestimatedutilityvalueEstU(X)ineachnodeN(X)
oftheIT-Tree. Thisvaluerepresentsanupper-boundonthe Although closed high utility itemset mining has many
utility of the itemset X and its supersets, and is used for applications, discovering CHUIs remains a computationally
reducing the search space. A data structure called expensive task. Therefore, there is a need for more efficient
transaction utility table (TU-Table) [20] is also adopted, algorithms[26]. Toaddressthisissue,thispaperproposesa
whichstoresthetransactionutilitiesofalltransactions. The novel algorithm named CLS-Miner to mine CHUIs
TU-Tableallowsto efficientlycalculatetheestimated utility efficiently. It is a one-phase algorithm (unlike CHUD),
of any itemset X, using its Tid set and without scanning the which relies on the utility-list structure to discover CHUIs
database. (similarly to CHUI-Miner). However, there are some key
Inthesecondphase,CHUDcalculatestheexactutilityof differences between CLS-Miner and CHUI-Miner. The
eachcandidateitemsetX foundinphase1tofilterthosethat proposed algorithm integrates three novel search space
are not HUIs. At the same time, the CHUD algorithm pruning strategies named (1) Chain-Estimated Utility
creates a structure called utility unit array for each CHUI. Co-occurrence Pruning (Chain-EUCP), (2) Lower Branch
This structure ensures that the set of CHUIs is a lossless Pruning (LBP), and (3) pruning by coverage. These novel
representation of all HUIs (that it can be used to derive all strategiescanpruneitemsetsinthesearchspacebeforetheir
other HUIs and their exact utilities). The CHUD algorithm utility-lists are constructed, and thus greatly reduce the cost
utilizes four strategies to reduce the search space. The first of mining CHUIs. Furthermore, an efficient pre-check
one is called Discarding Global Unpromising items (DGU). containing method is also proposed to quickly determine if
It consists of only considering promising items for an itemset is a subset of another itemset. This method is
generating candidates and to remove the utilities of usedtooptimizetheoperationsofclosurecomputationsand
unpromising items from the global TU-Table. The three subsumption checks typically performed by closed pattern
other strategies are named Removing the Exact utilities of mining algorithms. It will be shown in the experimental
items from the Global TU-Table (REG), Removing the evaluationofthispaperthattheproposedpre-checkmethod
Minimum itemset utilities from the Local TU-Tables considerablyreducesthetimefordiscoveringCHUIs.
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
6
of 5, 2, 1, 2, 3, 1, and 1. The itemset ac appears in
transactions T , T , and T . The items a, c, e, and g
1 2 3
3 Preliminariesandproblemdefinition respectivelyhaveinternalutilities(purchasequantities)of2,
6,2,and5,intransactionT .
2
Before presenting the proposed algorithms and its novel
strategies, it is necessary to introduce preliminaries related
Definition1[Utilityofaniteminatransaction]Theutilityof
tohighutilityitemsetmining, closeditemsetmining, andto
anitemiinatransactionT isdefinedasu(i,T )=q(i,T )×
d d d
formally define the problem of closed high utility itemset
p(i), whereq(i,T )istheinternalutility(purchasequantity)
d
mining. Thissectionintroducesthesedefinitions.
ofitemiintransactionT ,andp(i)istheexternalutility(unit
d
profit)ofitemi.
3.1 Problemdefinition
For example, in Table 1, u(a,T ) = 1 × 5 = 5, and
1
LetI ={i 1 ,i 2 ,... ,i m }beasetofitems. Apositivenumber u(c,T 1 )=1×1=1.
p(i ) is associated to each item i ∈ I, called the external
j j
utilityofi . Itrepresentstherelativeimportanceofitemi to Definition2[Utilityofanitemsetinatransaction]Theutility
j j
the user (e.g. the unit profit of i ). Let D be a transaction ofanitemsetXinatransactionT isdenotedasu(X,T )and
j d d
database containing a set of n transactions definedasu(X,T
)=(cid:80)
u(i,T ).
d i∈X d
D = {T 1 ,T 2 ,...,T n }suchthatT d ⊆ I(1 (cid:54) d (cid:54) n), andeach Forexample,inTable1,u(ac,T )=1×5+1×1=6,and
1
transaction T d has a unique identifier d called its Tid u(ac,T )=2×5+6×1=16.
2
(Transaction id). Moreover, given a transaction T and an
d
item i j , let q(i,T d ) be the internal utility (e.g. the purchase Definition3[Transactionutilityandtotalutility]Theutility
quantity) of item i in T d . An itemset X is a set of l distinct of a transaction T d is denoted as TU(T d ), and is calculated
items X = {i 1 , i 2 , ... , i l } such that X ⊆ I. An itemset as TU(T d ) = u(T d ,T d ). The total utility of a database D is
containing l items is said to be of length l, and to be an denoted as TUD(D), and is calculated as TUD(D) =
l-itemset. In the rest of this paper, for the sake of brevity, (cid:80) TU(T ,T ).
Td ∈D d d
each itemset will be denoted by the concatenation of its
For example, in Table 1, TU(T ) = 8, TU(T ) = 27,
items. For example, the itemset{x, y, z}willbedenoted as 1 2
TU(T ) = 30,TU(T ) = 20,TU(T ) = 11. Thetotalutility
xyz. The union of two itemsets X and Y will be denoted as 3 4 5
ofdatabaseDisTUD(D)=(TU(T )+TU(T )+TU(T )+
XY orX∪Y. 1 2 3
TU(T )+TU(T ))=8+27+30+20+11=96.
4 5
Table1 Anexampletransactiondatabase Definition 4 [Utility and relative utility of an itemset] The
TID Transaction TU utility of an itemset X in a database D is defined as u(X) =
T1 (a,1),(c,1),(d,1) 8 (cid:80)
u(X,T ). The relative utility of an itemset X in
T T 2 3 ( ( a a , , 2 1 ) ) , , ( ( c b , , 6 2 ) ) , , ( ( e c , , 2 1 ) ) , , ( ( g d , , 5 6 ) ),(e,1),(f,5) 2 3 7 0 a d X a ⊆ t T a d b ∧T a d s ∈ e D D is de d noted as ru(X) and is defined as ru(X) =
T4 (b,4),(c,3),(d,3),(e,1) 20 u(X)/TUD(D).
T5 (b,2),(c,2),(e,1),(g,2) 11
For example, in Table 1, u(ac) = u(ac,T )+u(ac,T )+
1 2
u(ac,T )=6+16+6=28. Therelativeutilityofitemsetac
3
isthusru(ac)=28/96=0.29.
Table2 Externalutilityvalues
Item a b c d e f g
Definition 5 [High utility itemset] Let there be a
Externalutility 5 2 1 2 3 1 1
user-specified minimum utility threshold minutil
(0 < minutil < TUD(D)). IftheutilityofanitemsetX isno
less than minutil, then X is said to be a high utility itemset
Example 1 Table 1 shows a transaction database D
(HUI). Otherwise, X is said to be a low utility itemset. The
containing five transactions (T , T , T , T , and T ), which
1 2 3 4 5
problem of high utility itemset mining consists of
willbeusedasrunningexample. Inthisdatabase,thesetof
items is I = {a, b, c, d, e, f, g}. The external utilities (e.g. discovering all high utility itemsets in a given transaction
database. AnequivalentdefinitionoftheproblemofHUIM
unit profits) of these items are presented in Table 2. The
itemsa,b,c,d,e, f,andgrespectivelyhaveexternalutilities isthefollowing. Givenarelativeminimumutilitythreshold
Front.Comput.Sci.
7
r_minutil = minutil/TUD(D), an itemset X is a high utility Forexample,theTUoftransactionsT ,T ,andT ofthe
1 2 3
itemsetifandonlyifru(X)(cid:62)r_minutil. runningexamplearerespectively8,27,and30. TheTWUof
Havingformallydefinedtheproblemofhighutilityitem- itemaisTWU(a) = TU(T )+TU(T )+TU(T )=8+27
1 2 3
setmining,thenextparagraphsdefinetheproblemofclosed +30=65. ThefollowingpropertyoftheTWUiscommonly
highutilityitemsetmining. usedtoprunethesearchspaceinHUIM.
Property 2 (Pruning using the TWU [8]). Let there be an
Definition 6 [Support and Tidset of an itemset] The Tid set
itemsetX. IfTWU(X)<minutil,thenXanditssupersetsare
(transaction id set) of an itemset X is the set of Tids of
lowutilityitemsets.
transactionscontainingX,andisdenotedasTidSet(X). The
support ofanitemset X isdenotedas sup(X)anddefinedas For example, the transaction-weighted utilization of item
sup(X) = |TidSet(X)|. In other words, the support of an f is TWU(f) = TU(T ) = 5 + 4 + 1 + 12 + 3 + 5 = 30.
3
itemset is the number of transactions where the itemset Table3showsthetransactionutilitiesofalltransactionsinD
appears. andtheTWU valuesofallitems.
Definition7[Closeditemset]AnitemsetXiscalledaclosed Table3 TheTWUvaluesandtransactionutilitiesfortherunningexample
itemset if there exists no proper superset Y ⊃ X in D such ItemName a b c d e f g
thatsup(X)= sup(Y)[21,22]. TWU 65 61 96 58 88 30 38
TID T1 T2 T3 T4 T5
TU 8 27 30 20 11
Definition 8 [Closed high utility itemset] An itemset X is a
closedhighutilityitemset(CHUI)ifXisclosedanditsutility
u(X)(cid:62)minutil[20,26].
3.2 Theutility-liststructure
Problem statement. Let there be a database D where
The proposed algorithm relies on the utility-list structure of
internal and external utilities are provided for all items.
theHUI-Mineralgorithm[9]tominehighutilityitemsetsin
Given a user-specified minimum utility threshold minutil,
a single phase. Therefore, this subsection introduces
the problem of closed high utility itemset mining is to
important definitions related to this structure and its key
discover all closed itemsets in D having utilities that are no
properties. The utility-list structure was proposed in
lessthantheminutilthreshold[20,26].
HUI-Miner to avoid the drawbacks of previous two-phase
Example2 ConsiderthedatabaseofTable1. Supposethat algorithms, which are maintaining a large amount of
the parameter minutil is set to 30 (or equivalently that candidates in memory and repeatedly scanning the database
r_minutil = 31%). The set of high utility itemsets for the tocalculatetheutilitiesofitemsets.
running example is H = {bd:30, ace:31, bcd:34, bce:31,
Definition10[Utility-list[9]]Withoutlossofgenerality,let
bde:36, bcde:40, and abcdef:30}, where the number beside
(cid:31) be a total order on items from I. The utility-list of an
each itemset indicates its utility. Among those itemsets, the
closed high utility itemsets are CH = {ace:31, bce:31, itemset X in a database D is denoted as ul(X). It contains a
tuple of the form (tid,iutil,rutil) for each transaction T
bcde:40,andabcdef:30}. tid
containing X (X ⊆ T ). The iutil element of a tuple
tid
In FIM, the downward closure property is used for
corresponding to a transaction T stores the utility of X in
tid
reducing the search space. However, this property does not
T . i.e., u(X,T ). The rutil element of a tuple stores the
tid tid
hold in HUIM, when considering the utility measure. To (cid:80)
value u(i,T ),calledtheremainingutility[9].
restore this property, the TWU measure was introduced and
i∈Ttid ∧i(cid:31)x∀x∈X tid
it is an upper-bound on the utility. The TWU measure is
definedasfollows[8].
Example 3 The utility-list of item a is {(T , 5, 3)(T , 10,
1 2
17)(T ,5,25)}. Theutility-listofitemeis{(T ,6,5)(T ,3,
Definition9 Thetransaction-weightedutilization(TWU)[8] 3 2 3
5)(T ,3,0)}. Theutility-listofitemsetaeis{(T ,16,5),(T ,
of an itemset X in a database D is denoted as TWU(X) and 4 2 3
definedasTWU(X)=(cid:80)
TU(T ).
8,5)}.
Td ∈D∧X⊆Td d
Utility-lists have the two following important properties,
Property1(Overestimation[8]). TheTWU ofanitemsetX whichareusedtocalculatetheutilityofanyitemset, andto
isnolessthanitsutility,thatisTWU(X)(cid:62)u(X). prunethesearchspace,respectively.
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
8
Property3(Sumofiutilvalues[9]). Lettherebeanitemset 3.3 Frequentcloseditemsetmining
X. The utility of X (denoted as u(X)) is equal to the sum of
Since the proposed algorithm mines closed patterns, this
theiutilvaluesinitsutility-listul(X). Ifthesumoftheiutil
subsection introduces the concept of closed itemset and its
valuesinul(X)ishigherthanorequaltotheminutilthreshold,
keyproperties. Thesepropertieswillbeusedintheproposed
itfollowsthatXisahighutilityitemset.Otherwise,itisalow
algorithm.
utilityitemset[9].
The task of mining frequent closed itemsets consists of
Property 4 (Pruning using the sum of iutil and rutil discovering all closed itemsets having support values that
values[9]). Lettherebeanitemset X. AnitemsetY issaid arenolessthanauser-specifiedminimumsupportthreshold
to be an extension of X iff Y can be obtained by appending minsup [22,23,30,31,34]. It has been shown in previous
anitemytoXsuchthaty(cid:31)i,∀i∈ X. Itcanbedemonstrated studies that the number of frequent closed itemsets is often
thatanytransitiveextensionofX canonlyhaveautilitythat much less than the number of frequent itemsets. Thus, it is
is less than or equal to the sum of iutil and rutil values in desirabletominecloseditemsets[20].
ul(X). Ifthesumofiutilandrutilvaluesintheutility-listof Most frequent closed itemset mining
X is less than minutil, all transitive extensions of X are low algorithms [22,23,30,31,34] discover closed itemsets by
utilityitemsets. performing two steps: search space browsing and closure
As proposed in the HUI-Miner algorithm [9], the computation. Among these algorithms, DCI-Closed [22] is
utility-listofanyitemsetcanbeobtainedbyintersectingthe one of the fastest algorithms. A typical closed itemset
utility-listsofsomeofitssubsets. Forexample,letP,Pxand mining algorithm browses the search space of itemsets by
Pybeitemsets,suchthatPxandPyareextensionsofPwith goingfromanequivalenceclasstoanotherbycomputingthe
items x andy, respectively. Theutility-listofitemsetPxyis closureofthevisitedfrequentitemsets. Thisprocessallows
obtained by applying Algorithm 1 [9]. For each element in toquicklyidentifythemaximalelement(thecloseditemset)
ul(x), the algorithm checks if there is an element ineachequivalenceclass. Twoitemsetsaresaidtobelongto
corresponding to the same transaction in ul(y). If there is thesameequivalenceclassiftheyappearinexactlythesame
one,abinarysearchisthenperformedintheutility-listof P set of transactions. Some key definitions related to closed
todetermineifthereisalsoanelementcorrespondingtothe itemsetsarethefollowing[22].
same transaction. Therefore, the complexity of this
Definition11[Closureofanitemset[22]]Theclosureofan
procedureisO(mlognz),wherem,n,andzarethenumberof
itemset X, denoted as C(X), is the largest set Y such that
entriesinul(x),ul(y),andul(P),respectively.
X ⊆ Y and sup(X) = sup(Y). Analternativeandequivalent
Algorithm1Theutility-listconstructionprocedure definitionisC(X) = (cid:84) T . AnitemsetX iscalleda
d∈TidSet(X) d
Input: closeditemset,ifX =C(X).
ul(P):theutility-listofitemsetP;
ul(Px): theutility-listofitemsetPx; Definition 12 [Generator [22]] A generator is an itemset of
ul(Py): theutility-listofitemsetPy; theformX =Y ∪i,whereY isacloseditemsetandi(cid:60)Y. A
Output:
generatorX issaidtobeorderpreservingifC(X) = Y ∪ior
ul(Pxy): theutility-listofitemsetPxy;
i≺C(Y∪i)\Y∪i.
1:
ul(Pxy)=NULL;
Tobrowsethesearchspaceofitemsetsandfindtheclosed
2: foreach(tupleex∈ul(Px))do
3: if (∃ey∈ul(Py)andex.tid==ey.tid)then itemsets,severalalgorithmsstartfromtheminimalelements
4: if (ul(P)isnotempty)then ofeachequivalenceclass(thegenerators)[22]. Assoonasa
5: Searchelemente∈ul(P)suchthate.tid=ex.tid; generator is found, its closure is computed. Then, new
6:
exy←−(ex.tid;ex.iutil+ey.iutil-e.iutil;ey.rutil);
generators are built from that closed itemset by appending
7: else singleitemstothatitemset,andtheprocessisrepeatedwith
8:
exy←−(ex.tid;ex.iutil+ey.iutil;ey.rutil);
eachofthesegeneratorstofindothercloseditemsets. Since
9: endif
10: ul(Pxy)←−ul(Pxy)∪exy; a closed itemset is the maximal element of its equivalence
11: endif classes, this strategy guarantees that jumping from an
12: endfor equivalence class to another will not miss any closed
13: returnul(Pxy); itemsets. However,severalgeneratorshavethesameclosure.
Thus, it is necessary to utilize a mechanism to avoid
Front.Comput.Sci.
9
generating the same closed itemset more than once. A • Third, an efficient CHUIM algorithm should calculate
solutiontothisproblemistousethefollowingproperty[22]. theutilityofitemsetsefficiently. Toavoidgeneratinga
huge number of candidates and directly calculate the
Property 5. ( [22]) Given two itemsets Y and X, if Y ⊂ X
andsupp(X)= supp(Y)thenC(X)=C(Y). utility of itemsets, many recent state-of-the-art HUI
mining algorithms utilize the utility-list structure.
Therefore, if a generator Y is found, having the same
However,acostlyjoinoperationneedstobeperformed
support as an already discovered closed itemset X and
tobuildutility-listsofl itemsets(l > 1). Therefore, an
Y ⊂ X,itcanbeconcludedthattheclosureofY isX. Inthis
important question is how to reduce the cost of join
case,itissaidthatXsubsumesY,anditbecomesunecessary
operations,oravoidperformingitwhenpossible[11].
to compute the closure of Y. Otherwise, the closure of Y
shouldbecomputedtoobtainanewcloseditemset. Thissectiondescribeshowthesechallengesareaddressedin
To compute the closure of a generator X, the following theproposedCLS-Mineralgorithm. Thedesignedalgorithm
propertycanbeemployed[22]. introduces three novel search space pruning strategies to
prune low utility itemsets without fully constructing their
Property 6. ( [22]) Given an itemset X and an item i ∈ I,
utility-lists. These strategies are presented next in
TidSet(X)⊆TidSet(i)⇔i∈C(X).
Subsections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3, respectively. Moreover, an
By the above property, if TidSet(X) ⊆ TidSet(i), it efficientpre-checkmethodisintroducedinSubsection4.4to
follows that i belongs to the closure of X. Therefore, by optimize the operations of subsumption checking and
performing this inclusion check for all the items in I not closure computation to identify closed itemsets efficiently.
included in X, the closure C(X) of any itemset X can be Then, the next section (Section 5) will present the proposed
computed. algorithm which combines all the proposed strategies and
Having presented the problem of high utility itemset thepre-checkmethod.
mining, closed high utility itemset mining, and important
properties related to closed itemset mining, the following 4.1 The Chain-estimated utility co-occurrence pruning
sectionintroducestheproposedtechniques. strategy
The first proposed pruning strategy is named
Chain-Estimated Utility Co-occurrence Pruning
4 Proposedstrategiesandpre-checkmethod
(Chain-EUCP). It relies on a structure called the Estimated
To design an efficient CHUI mining algorithm, three key Utility Co-occurrence Structure (EUCS) [11], which is
challengesmustbeaddressed. definedasfollows.
• First, it is necessary to design effective search space
Definition13[TheEUCS[11]]LetI∗ bethesetofallitems
pruningtechniques. Thereasonisthatthesearchspace
having a TWU no less than minutil in a database D. The
in itemset mining tasks is very large. For example, if
Estimated Utility Co-occurrence Structure of database D is
there are 1000 distinct items in a database, there are
denoted as EUCS and defined as EUCS = {(a; b;
21000 − 1 possible itemsets (by excluding the empty D D
TWU(ab))∈ I∗×I∗×R+}.
set). To design a HUIM algorithm, it is necessary to
As other efficient one-phase algorithms for
design search space pruning techniques that rely on
HUIM [9,11,24–26], the proposed CLS-Miner algorithm
propertiesoftheutilitymeasure[8–13].
• Second, efficient techniques must be designed to avoid scans the database twice to compute the TU and TWU
valuesofallitemsand2-itemsets,aswellastoconstructthe
consideringasmanynoncloseditemsetsaspossible.As
EUCS. During the first database scan, the TWU values and
mentioned in the previous section, most closed pattern
the utilities of all items are calculated. The TWU values of
mining algorithms perform two key operations, which
items are then used to establish a total order (cid:31) on items
aresubsumptionchecksandclosurecomputations[5,22,
appearing in the transaction database, which is the order of
23].
Thesetwooperationsarerepeatedlyperformedbymost ascending TWU values as suggested in previous
closeditemsetminingalgorithmstoprunethesearchs- work [9–11]. The second database scan constructs the
paceofnoncloseditemsets. Forthisreason,itiscrucial EUCS. During this database scan, items in transaction are
toimplementthemefficiently. reorderedusingtheascendingorderofTWU values.
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
10
Item f g d b a e c Inpreviouswork[11], Property7wasusedtoreducethe
TWU 30 38 58 61 65 88 96
search space. In this paper, a more general version of this
propertyisproposedtoprunealargerpartofthesearchspace.
TID OrderedTransaction
Property 8 (Generalized EUCP property). Let there be a
T (d,1),(a,1),(c,1)
1
T (g,5),(a,2),(e,2),(c,6) non-empty itemset X and an item x ∈ X. Furthermore, let
2
T (f,5),(d,6),(b,2),(a,1),(e,1),(c,1) there be an item y, such that Xy is an extension of X. If
3
T 4 (d,3),(b,4),(e,1),(c,3) TWU(xy)<minutil,thenXyanditstransitiveextensionsare
T (g,2),(b,2),(e,1),(c,2)
5 lowutilityitemsets.
Item f g d b a e Proof LetZ beanyextensionofXy. SinceXy⊆Z and xy⊆
g 0 Xy, it follows that xy ⊆ Z. Because TWU(xy) < minutil, Z
d 30 0 anditssupersetsarelowutilityitemsets(byProperty2). (cid:3)
b 30 11 50
a 30 27 38 30 The novel Chain-EUCP strategy applies Property 8 to
e 30 38 50 61 57
directly prune an itemset Pxy and its transitive extensions
c 30 38 58 61 65 88
without constructing their utility-lists. By Property 2, if
Fig.1 ItemsarereorderedbyascendingorderofTWUvalues(top).Trans- there is a tuple (x;y;TWU(xy)) in the EUCS such that
actionsaresortedaccordingtothisorder(middle). TheEUCSmatrix(bot- TWU(xy)<minutil,thenanysupersetPxyofxyhasautility
tom).
lowerthanminutil. Thus,iftheaboveconditionismet, Pxy
anditstransitiveextensionsdonotneedtobeconsideredby
Example4 Considerdatabase Doftherunningexampleas
theproposedalgorithm. TheproposedChain-EUCPstrategy
shown in Table 1. During the first database scan, the TWU
is different from the EUCP strategy [11] used in previous
values of all items are calculated (top of Fig. 1). Then,
work. For an itemset Pxy, the EUCP only checks the
during the second database scan, transactions are reordered
pruningconditionforthetwolastitems xandyappendedto
by ascending order of TWU values (middle of Fig. 1), and
Pxy, while the Chain-EUCP strategy checks the pruning
the EUCS structure is built (bottom of Fig. 1). In this
condition TWU(ab) < minutil for all pairs of items
example, the EUCS is represented as a triangular matrix,
a,b∈ Pxy. Iftheconditionismetforanysuchpairofitems,
where each row/column represents an item, and each cell
it follows that Pxy and its supersets are low utility itemsets,
indicates the TWU of the itemset formed by combining the
and hence that they do not need to be considered by the
items corresponding to the column and row. An interesting
proposed algorithm (by Property 8). The proposed
observationisthatsomepairsofitemsneverco-occurinthe
Chain-EUCP strategy is thus more general than the EUCP
database, and hence have a TWU value of zero. For
strategy used in previous work [11], and can prune a larger
example, the item g does not appear in any of the
part of the search space. The proposed algorithm, which
transactionscontaining f ord.
reliesonthisstrategywillbepresentedinSection5.
In previous work [11], the following property was
proposed to reduce the search space using the EUCS. This
4.2 Thecoverageconcept
property is known as the EUCP (Estimated Utility
The second novel strategy proposed in this paper is based
Co-occurrencePruning)property.
onanovelconceptofcoverage. Thisconceptisinspiredby
Property7(EUCPproperty[11]). Lettherebeanon-empty
the definition of frequent closed itemsets in FIM [4]. This
itemsetX = {x ,x ,...x }. Furthermore,lettherebeanitem
1 2 z subsection first presents the concept of Coverage, and then
y, such that Xy is an extension of X (that is y (cid:31) x ). If
z explains how this concept is used to calculate the utility of
TWU(x y) < minutil, then Xy and its transitive extensions
z itemsetsandproposesanewstrategyforreducingthesearch
arelowutilityitemsets.
spacewhenminingclosedhighutilityitemsets.
Proof Let Z be a transitive extension of Xy. Since Xy ⊆ Z
Definition 14 [Coverage] Let there be two items i, j ∈ I.
and x y ⊆ Xy, it follows that x y ⊆ Z. Because
z z ItemjissaidtocoveriifTidSet(i)⊆TidSet(j). Thecoverage
TWU(x y) < minutil, Z and its supersets are low utility
z of item i is denoted as Cov(i) and defined as
itemsets(byProperty2). (cid:3) Cov(i)={z|TidSet(i)⊆TidSet(z)∧z∈ I}.
Front.Comput.Sci.
11
Property9. (RelationshipbetweentheTWUandcoverage) Property 10 (Utility of a coverage itemset). Let there be a
Lettherebetwoitemsi, j ∈ I inadatabaseD. Wehavethat coverage itemset X = pp p ...p . The utility of X can be
1 2 r
j∈Cov(i)iffTWU(i)=TWU(ij). efficientlycalculatedusingthefollowingformula:
Proof LetthenotationTidSet(xy)denotesthesetofTidsof
u(X)=(cid:80)
1(cid:54)i(cid:54)r u(pp i )−(r−1)×u(p)
transactionscontainingxbutnoty. TheTWUoftheitemset
ijisdefinedbythefollowingformula. Proof Because p ∈ Cov(p), it follows that TidSet(p) ⊆
i
(cid:88) (cid:88) TidSet(p). Therefore, TidSet(pp) = TidSet(p), and
TWU(ij)= TU(T )= TU(T ) i i
d d TidSet(pp p ...p )=TidSet(p).
Td ∈D∧ij⊆Td Td ∈TidSet(ij) 1 2 r
(cid:88) (cid:88)
= TU(T d )+ TU(T d ) u(X)=u(pp p ...p )= (cid:88) u(pp p ...p ,T )
1 2 r 1 2 r d
Td ∈TidS
(cid:88)
et(ij) Td ∈TidSet(ij)
(cid:88)
Td ∈TidSet(p)
− TU(T d ) = [u(p,T d )+u(p 1 ,T d )+...+u(p r ,T d )]
Td ∈TidSet(ij) Td ∈TidSet(p)
(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
= TU(T )− TU(T ) = [[(u(p,T )+u(p ,T ))+...+(u(p,T )
d d d 1 d d
Td ∈TidSet(i) Td ∈TidSet(ij) Td ∈TidSet(p)
(cid:88) +u(p ,T )]−(r−1)×u(p,T )]
=TWU(i)− TU(T ) r d d
d (cid:88)
= [[(u(p,T )+u(p ,T ))+...+(u(p,T )
Td ∈TidSet(ij) d 1 d d
Td ∈TidSet(p)
Therefore, (cid:88)
+u(p ,T ))]−(r−1)× u(p,T )]
r d d
TWU(ij)=TWU(i)
(cid:88) (cid:88)
Td ∈TidSet(p)
(cid:88) = [u(p,T )+u(p,T )]−(r−1)×u(p)
⇔ TU(T )=0⇔TidSet(ij)=∅ d i d
d 1(cid:54)i(cid:54)rTd ∈TidSet(p)
Td ∈TidSet(ij)
=
(cid:88)
u(pp)−(r−1)×u(p)
⇔TidSet(i)⊆TidSet(j)⇔ j∈(i) i
1(cid:54)i(cid:54)r
(cid:3) (cid:3)
This property provides a simple way of calculating the
Example6ConsidertheexampledatabasegiveninTable1.
coverage of any single item i ∈ I using the TWU of single
The coverage of item b is Cov(b) = {e,c}, as explained in
items and the EUCS structure presented in the previous
Example 5. By applying Property 10, the utility of the
subsection.
coverage itemset bec can be calculated directly without
Example 5 Consider the example database depicted in constructingitsutility-listasfollows:
Table 1. Fig. 1 (top) indicates the TWU values of all items u(bec)=u(be)+u(bc)−u(b)=25+22-16=31.
and presents the corresponding EUCS (bottom). Consider
Using the above property, the utility of any coverage
the item b, we have TWU(b) = 61. In the EUCS, there are itemset X can be obtained directly by adding the utilities of
two tuples containing b, which are (b,c,61) and (b,e,61).
2-itemsets and subtracting the utility of a 1-itemset. Thus,
The TWU values stored in these tuples are equal to the utility of X can be obtained without performing
TWU(b) = 61. Hence, the coverage of item b is
utility-list intersections or additional database scans. The
Cov(b)={c,e}.
only requirement for calculating the utility of an itemset
In the following, an itemset obtained by performing the
using the above property is to precalculate the coverage of
unionofanitemanditscoverageiscalledacoverageitemset.
eachitem,andtheutilitiesof1-itemsetsand2-itemsets. The
For example, the itemset bce is a coverage itemset since it coverage of all items can be efficiently calculated using the
can be obtained by performing the union of the item b with
EUCSstructurebyapplyingtheproposedAlgorithm2.
itscoverageCov(b)={c,e}.
Moreover, this paper also introduces a second property
Tocalculatetheutilityofanycoverageitemset X suchas for pruning the search space of itemsets using the novel
bcewithoutperformingutility-listintersectionsoradditional concept of coverage. This pruning strategy is integrated in
databasescans,thefollowingpropertyisintroduced. theproposedCLS-Mineralgorithm.
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
12
Algorithm2TheCoverageConstructProcedure is a one-phase algorithm that introduced a novel pruning
Input: ThesetofitemsI; strategytoreducethesearchspaceusingthesumofiutiland
Output: ThecoverageofeachiteminI;
rutilvaluesintheutility-listofanitemsetX (Property4). If
1: foreachitemx∈Ido this sum is less than minutil, then the itemset X and its
2: Cov(x)←−∅;
transitiveextensionsarelowutilityitemsetsanddonotneed
3: foreachitemy∈Iandy(cid:31) xdo
4: if (EUCS(x,y)=TWU(x))then to be considered. Although this strategy was shown to be
5: Cov(x)←−Cov(x)∪y; effectiveforreducingthesearchspace, adrawbackisthatit
6: endif can only be applied to an itemset X after its utility-list has
7: endfor beenfullyconstructed. However,constructingtheutility-list
8: endfor of an itemset is very costly. It is thus desirable to design
pruning strategies that can prune an itemset X and its
Property11(PruningusingtheCoverage). Lettherebeas- transitive extensions before its utility-list is fully
ingleitemp,andCov(p)beitscoverage. Furthermore,con- constructed. TheproposedChain-EUCPstrategyisonesuch
sideranitemsetY ⊆Cov(p),andanitemsetX suchthatX∩ strategy, which relies on information about item
Y = ∅andp (cid:60) X. If p∪X isahighutilityitemset,then p∪ co-occurrences to reduce the search space. In this
X∪Y isalsoahighutilityitemset. subsection, Property 4 is adapted to introduce a novel
strategy for pruning an itemset X and its transitive
Proof BecauseY isasubsetofCov(p),itfollowsthat:
extensions (called lower branches) before its utility-list is
TidSet(p∪X∪Y)=TidSet(p∪X).
constructed. This strategy is called Lower Branch Pruning
Theutilityoftheitemset p∪X∪Y iscalculatedas:
(LBP) and it relies on a new upper-bound on the utility of
(cid:88)
u(p∪X∪Y)= u(p∪X∪Y,T ) itemsets and their extensions, named the conjunction
d
upper-bound utility. The LBP strategy is based on the
Td ∈D
(cid:88)
= [u(p∪X,T )+u(Y,T )] followingdefinitionsandproperties.
d d
Td ∈Tid
(cid:88)
Set(p∪X)
Definition 15 [TidSet Difference] Let there be an itemset X
= u(p∪X,T )
d and an itemset Y such that their Tid sets are TidSet(X) and
Td ∈TidSe (cid:88) t(p∪X) TidSet(Y),respectively. ThesizedifferenceoftheTidsetsof
+ u(Y,T )
d X and Y is denoted as diff(X,Y), and is calculated as
Td ∈TidSet(p∪X) (cid:88) diff(X,Y) = abs(|TidSet(X)| − |TidSet(Y)|), where abs is
=u(p∪X)+ u(Y,T )>u(p∪X)
d theabsolutevaluefunction.
Td ∈TidSet(p∪X)
Thus,if p∪XisaHUI,thenu(p∪X)(cid:62)minutil. Hence, Property12. LettherebeanitemsetXandanitemsetYsuch
u(p∪X∪Y)>u(p∪X)(cid:62)minutil. Therefore, p∪X∪Y isa that X ∩Y = ∅. The relation diff(X,XY) (cid:62) |TidSet(X)|−
highutilityitemset. (cid:3) min(|TidSet(X)|,|TidSet(Y)|)holds. Forthesakeofbrevity,
thevalue|TidSet(X)|−min(|TidSet(X)|,|TidSet(Y)|)willbe
Furthermore, it can be easily seen by Definition 14 denotedascdiff(X,Y).
(related to the coverage) and Property 6 (related to closure
Proof Since TidSet(XY) ⊆ TidSet(X) and
computations)thatifanitem jbelongstothecoverageofan
TidSet(XY) ⊆ TidSet(Y), then |TidSet(XY)| (cid:54) |TidSet(X)|
itemi,itfollowsthat jbelongstotheclosureofallitemsets
and|TidSet(XY)|(cid:54)|TidSet(Y)|
containingtheitemi. Hence,theconceptofcoverageisalso
⇒|TidSet(XY)|(cid:54)min(|TidSet(X)|,|TidSet(Y)|)
integratedintotheprocessofclosurecomputation.
⇒ diff(X,XY) = |TidSet(X)| − |TidSet(XY)| (cid:62)
The proposed algorithm integrating this strategy and the
|TidSet(X)|−min(|TidSet(X)|,|TidSet(Y)|). (cid:3)
otherstrategiespresentedinthissection(Section4), willbe
presentedinSection5.
Definition 16 [The smallest sum of iutil and rutil values of
4.3 Thelowerbranchpruningstrategy
an itemset] The smallest sum of the iutil and rutil values of
A third novel pruning strategy is introduced in this section. anitemsetX isdenotedasul (X). Itisdefinedasthesum
min
Itismotivatedbythefollowingobservation. HUI-Miner[9] ulm.iutils + ulm.rutils for the tuple ulm ∈ ul(X) such that
Front.Comput.Sci.
13
(cid:64)ulk ∈ ul(X) where (ulk.iutils + ulk.rutils) < (ulm.iutils + Theabovepropertyisusedtoprunethesearchspace. For
ulm.rutils). a given itemset X, if con(X,y) is less than minutil, then Xy
and all its transitive extensions are low utility itemsets, and
Definition17[Conjunctionupper-boundutility]Lettherebe canthusbepruned. Asitwillbeshownintheexperimental
an itemset X and an item y (cid:31) i,∀i ∈ X. The conjunction evaluationofthispaper,theLBPstrategycangreatlyreduce
upper-bound utility of itemset X with respect to item y is the number of extensions considered by the proposed CLS-
denoted as con(X,y) and defined as con(X,y) = Mineralgorithm,andthusalsoreducesitsrunningtimesince
(cid:80) ul∈UL(X) (ul.iutil+ul.rutil)−cdiff(X,y)×ul min (X). theconstructionofnumerousutility-listscanbeavoided.
This upper-bound is calculated very efficiently in the TheproposedCLS-Mineralgorithmintegratingthenovel
proposed CLS-Miner algorithm, and is used for pruning the LBPstrategyandtheotherstrategiespresentedinthissection
searchspacebasedonthefollowingproperties. (Section4)ispresentedinSection5.
Property13. LettherebeanitemsetX andanitemy, such
4.4 A pre-check method for fast subsumption checks and
thaty(cid:31)i,∀i∈ X. Thevaluecon(X,y)isnolessthanthesum
closurecomputations
of iutil and rutil values in the utility-list of Xy, i.e.,
con(X,y)(cid:62)(cid:80) (ul.iutil+ul.rutil).
ul∈UL(Xy) This section introduces a fourth technique that will be used
to improve the performance of the proposed algorithm
Proof Let UL(xy) denote the subset of the utility-list of x
(described in the next section). This technique reduces the
corresponding to transactions where y does not appear. In
cost of subsumption checks and closure computations.
otherwords,UL(xy)={ul|ul∈UL(x)∧y(cid:60)T }. Hence,
ul.tid
These two operations are performed by most closed pattern
(cid:88)
con(X,y)= (ul.iutil+ul.rutil)−cdiff(X,y)×ul (X) mining algorithms to respectively determine if an itemset is
min
ul∈UL(X) closed,andotherwisetodirectlyobtainitsclosure(andthus
(cid:88)
con(X,y)= (ul.iutil+ul.rutil) prune the search space). Because both subsumption checks
ul∈UL(Xy) andclosurecomputationsaretypicallyrepeatedlyperformed
(cid:88)
+ (ul.iutil+ul.rutil) by closed pattern mining algorithms, it is crucial to
ul∈UL(Xy) implement these operations efficiently in a CHUIM
−cdiff(X,y)×ul min (X) algorithm. Inthissection,weproposeanefficientpre-check
LetLH =con(X,y)− (cid:80) (ul.iutil+ul.rutil). Then, method to optimize both operations. Recall that closure
ul∈UL(Xy)
computation consists of calculating the smallest closed
(cid:88)
LH = (ul.iutil+ul.rutil)−cdiff(X,y)×ul (X) itemset that is a superset of a given itemset. The
min
ul∈UL(Xy) subsumptionrelationisdefinedasfollows.
(cid:88)
LH (cid:62) ul (X)−cdiff(X,y)×ul (X)
min min
Definition 18 [Subsume [20,22]] Let there be two itemsets
ul∈UL(Xy)
LH (cid:62)diff(X,Xy)×ul (X)−cdiff(X,y)×ul (X) X and Y. The itemset X is said to subsume Y if and only if
min min
LH (cid:62)(diff(X,Xy)−cdiff(X,y))×ul (X)(cid:62)0 Y ⊂ Xandsup(Y)= sup(X).
min
For example, bce subsumes bc because bc ⊂ bce and
Thereforecon(X,y)(cid:62)(cid:80)
ul∈UL(Xy)
(ul.iutil+ul.rutil). (cid:3)
sup(bc)= sup(bce)=3.
Property 14 (Lower Branch Pruning). Let there be an Definition 19 [PreSet and PostSet [22]] Let there be an
itemset X andan item y (cid:31) i,∀i ∈ X. If con(X,y) < minutil, itemset Px = P∪x,where Pisacloseditemset,and xisan
then Xy and all its transitive extensions are low utility item such that x (cid:60) P. The PreSet of Px is defined as
itemsets. PreSet(Px) = {y ∈ I|y (cid:60) Pxandy ≺ x}. The PostSet of Px
isdefinedasPostSet(Px)={y∈ I|y(cid:60) Pxandy(cid:31) x}.
Proof Since con(X,y) (cid:62) (cid:80) (ul.iutil + ul.rutil) (by
ul∈UL(Xy)
When an itemset Y is generated by the algorithm, a
Property 13), and con(X,y) < minutil, it follows that
(cid:80) (ul.iutil + ul.rutil) < minutil. Therefore, by subsumptioncheckisperformedtodetermineifY isasubset
ul∈UL(Xy)
ofapreviouslyfoundcloseditemset. Ifyes,itfollowsthatY
Property 4, the itemset Xy and its transitive extensions are
lowutilityitemsets. (cid:3) is non closed and that the supersets of Y do not need to be
explored since their closure has been already
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
14
discovered [22]. To implement subsumption checks integer m is the smallest position that satisfies
efficiently, a challenge is that the set of previously found TidSet (Y)<TidSet (J).
m m
closeditemsetsbecomeslargerasmoreCHUIsarefoundby - If m = 1, then TidSet (Y) < TidSet (J), and therefore
1 1
thealgorithm. Thus,eachnewitemsetneedstobecompared TidSet (Y) (cid:60) TidSet(J). Thisisincontradictionwiththe
1
with an ever increasing set of closed itemsets. To avoid the
statementthatY issubsumedbyJ.
performance degration that would result from such an
- If m > 1, since TidSet (Y) < TidSet (J) and
m m
implementation of subsumption checking, it is necessary to TidSet (Y) > TidSet (Y) (cid:62) TidSet (J),itfollows
m (m−1) (m−1)
implementthisoperationmoreefficiently.
that TidSet (J) < TidSet (Y) < TidSet (J) ⇒
(m−1) m m
In the CHUD [20] and CHUI-Miner [26] algorithms, TidSet (Y) (cid:60) TidSet(J), which is in contradiction with
m
subsumption checks are implemented by the
thestatementthatY issubsumedbyJ.
IsSubsumedCheck procedure presented in Algorithm 3. To
further optimize this procedure, the next paragraphs Therefore (cid:64)i,1 (cid:54) i (cid:54) |TidSet(Y)| such that TidSet i (Y) <
introduce a novel property establishing a relationship TidSet i (J), inequality (2) holds. The inequality (3) can be
between the Tidsets of a pair of itemsets and the proveninasimilarway. (cid:3)
subsumption relation between these itemsets. This property
is the basis for the efficient fast subsumption checking Both the proposed CLS-Miner and the CHUI-Miner [26]
procedureproposedinthispaper. algorithms are utility-list based algorithms. Therefore, the
subsumption check operation can be costly. To perform
Algorithm3IsSubsumedCheckProcedure
subsumption check efficiently, we introduce some
Input: AnitemsetY,PreSet(Y);
improvements based on Property 15. These improvements
Output: Return true if Y is subsumed by an already
consist of checking three conditions before performing a
mined closed high utility itemset. Otherwise, return
false. subsumptioncheck.
1: foreach(itemJ∈PreSet(Y))do • First, the length of the utility lists of Y and J is
2: if (TidSet(Y)⊆TidSet(J))then compared. Ifthelengthoftheutility-listofY isgreater
3: Returntrue;
thanthatofJ,Y isnotsubsumedbyJ.
4: endif
• Second, if there exists a transaction identifier in
5: endfor
6: Return false; TidSet(Y) that is smaller than the one at the same
position in TidSet(J), then Y is also not subsumed by
J.
Property 15 (Subsume relation). Let there be two itemset • Third, if there exists a Tid in TidSet(Y) that is greater
J and Y. Furthermore, assume that the Tid sets TidSet(Y) than the one at the same position in TidSet(J) when
and TidSet(J) are sorted in ascending order of transaction readingtheTidsetsfromrighttoleft,thenY isalsonot
identifiers. Moreover,letthenotationTidSet i (X)denotesthe subsumedbyJ.
TidvaluestoredatpositioniintheTidsetofanitemsetX. If
If an itemset Y passes these three conditions, then the
YissubsumedbyJthenthethreefollowinginequalitiesmust
proposed algorithm performs the subsumption check as in
hold:
CHUI-Miner. Otherwise, the subsumption check is not
(1) |TidSet(Y)|(cid:54)|TidSet(J)|
performed since it follows by Property 15 that Y is not
(2) TidSet(Y)(cid:62)TidSet(J),∀i,1(cid:54)i(cid:54)|TidSet(Y)|.
i i subsumed by X. The three proposed pre-check conditions
(3) TidSet (Y) (cid:54) TidSet(J),∀i,|TidSet(J)| −
i−diff(J,Y) i are especially effective for sparse or short transaction
|TidSet(Y)|<i(cid:54)|TidSet(J)|.
datasets, as it will be shown in the experimental evaluation.
The detailed pseudo-code of the modified subsumption
Proof Since Y is subsumed by J, it follows that checking method is presented in Algorithm 4. It relies on a
TidSet(Y) ⊆ TidSet(J), and thus that procedure named precheckContain, which checks the three
|TidSet(Y)| (cid:54) |TidSet(J)|. We prove that inequality (2) conditions. This procedure is also used in the main search
holds by showing that (cid:64)i,1 (cid:54) i (cid:54) |TidSet(Y)| if procedure of the proposed algorithm for calculating the
TidSet(Y) < TidSet(J). Assume that closure of itemsets. The proposed algorithm is described in
i i
∃i,1 (cid:54) i (cid:54) |TidSet(Y)| and TidSet(Y) < TidSet(J). The thenextsection.
i i
Front.Comput.Sci.
15
Algorithm4TheimprovedIsSubsumedCheckProcedure Chain-EUCP strategy to prune the search space using the
Input: AnitemsetY andPreSet(Y); EUCSstructure. Thisstrategycangreatlyreducethenumber
Output: Return true if Y is subsumed by an already
of join operations that are performed for constructing
mined closed high utility itemset. Otherwise, return
utility-lists,similarlytothelessgeneralEUCPstrategyused
false;
inpreviouswork[11]. CLS-Mineralsoappliesthedesigned
1: foreach(itemJ∈PreSet(Y))do
LBP strategy to reduce the search space. Moreover, the
2: if preCheckContain(J,Y)then
3: if (TidSet(Y)⊆TidSet(J))then concept of coverage and pruning using the converage is
4: Returntrue; integratedintoclosurecomputationtofindpotentialCHUIs.
5: else In addition, CLS-Miner utilizes the proposed fast
6: Return false; subsumption checking method. The main procedure of
7: endif
CLS-MinerisgiveninAlgorithm5.
8: else
The proposed algorithm first scans the database D to
9: Return false;
10: endif calculate the TWU values of all items (line 1). Then, the
11: endfor algorithm identifies the set I∗ of all items having a TWU
value no less than minutil (line 2). Items not in this set are
ProcedurepreCheckContain(X,Y) henceforthignoredsincetheycannotbepartofahighutility
Input: X:anitemset,Y:anitemset;
itemset according to Property 2. The TWU values of these
Output: ReturntrueifXpotentiallycontainsY. Otherwise,
items are then used to establish a total order (cid:31) on items,
return false;
which is the order of ascending TWU values (line 3). A
1: lenX =|TidSet(X)|;
2: lenY =|TidSet(Y)|; second database scan is then performed. During this
3: if (lenX <lenY)then database scan, items in transactions are reordered according
4: Return false; tothetotalorder(cid:31),theutility-listofeachitemi ∈ I∗ isbuilt
5: endif and the EUCS structure is built (line 4). The coverage
6: for(inti=0;i<lenX;i++) do relation is then constructed by calling the
7: if (TidSet(X).getTid(i)>TidSet(Y).getTid(i))then
CoverageConstruct procedure (line 5). Then, the recursive
8: Return false;
Search-CHUI procedure is called to recursively search for
9: endif
10:
if(TidSet(X).getTid(lenX-i)<TidSet(Y).getTid(lenY-i)) closedhighutilityitemsetsusingadepth-firstsearchsimilar
then to the DCI_CLOSED [22], CHUD [20] and
11: Return false; CHUI-Miner [26] algorithms. The procedure takes as input
12: endif parametersthecurrentitemsettobeextendedP,thetwosets
13: endfor
ofitemsPreSet(P)andPostSet(P),andthe EUCS structure.
14: Returntrue;
The procedure outputs all the closed high utility itemsets
that strictly contain P by analyzing all the valid closed
itemsets that are obtained by extending P with the items in
itsPostSet.
5 TheproposedCLS-Mineralgorithm The main steps of the Search-CHUI procedure are the
following. For each itemset x of PostSet(P), an itemset
This section first presents the CLS-Miner algorithm and
Px = P ∪ x is created, denoted as Px, and its utility-list
discusses its complexity. Then, a detailed example of how
UL(Px)isbuiltusingAlgorithm1(lines2-3). Ifthesumof
the algorithm works on the running example database is
the iutil and rutil values in the utility-list of Px is no less
presented.
thanminutil,thenextensionsofPxwillbeexplored(line4).
Before exploring these extensions, the procedure
5.1 Thedesignedalgorithm
IsSubsumedCheck(Px, PreSet(P))iscalledtocheckwhether
The proposed CLS-Miner algorithm finds closed itemsets Px is included in previously found closed itemsets. If yes,
efficiently by employing the search space browsing and then supersets of X do not need to be explored (line 5). If
closure computation techniques of the DCI_CLOSED no, the search procedure tries to merge Px with each item
algorithm[22], andbyintegratingthefournoveltechniques y ∈ PostSet(P)suchthaty (cid:31) xtoformalargeritemsetPxy.
presented in Section 4. CLS-Miner applies the efficient ThevariablepostSetNewstoresasetofitemscalledpost-set
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
16
Algorithm5CLS-Miner
Input: atransactiondatabaseDandtheminutilthreshold;
Output: thecompletesetofclosedhighutilityitemsets;
1: ScanDtocalculatetheTWUofeachsingleitem;
2:
LetI∗bethelistofitemshavingTWUvaluesnolessthanminutil;
3:
Let(cid:31)betheascendingorderofTWUvaluesonitemsinI∗;
4: ScanDtobuildtheutility-listofeachitemi∈I∗andtheEUCS D structure;
5: CallCoverageConstruct();
6: Search-CHUI(∅,∅,theutility-listofitems∈I∗,EUCS D );
ProcedureSearch-CHUI()
Input:P:anitemset,PreSet(P):asetofpre-extensionsofP,PostSet(P):asetofpost-extensionsofP,andtheEUCSstructure;
Output: thecompletesetofclosedhighutilityitemsets;
1: foreachitemsetx∈ PostSet(P)do
2: Px←− P∪x;
3: ConstructtheutilitylistofPx,UL(Px);
4: if (SUM(UL(Px).iutils+SUM(UL(Px).rutils)(cid:62)minutil)then
5: if IsSubsumedCheck(Px,PreSet(P))= falsethen
6:
postSetNew←−∅;
7: Declarevariable passed =true;
8: foreachitemsety∈ PostSet(P)andy(cid:31) x do
9: if con(Px,y)<minutilthen
10: continue;
11: endif
12: if (∃i∈ PxsuchthatEUCS(i,y)<minutil)then
13: continue;
14: endif
15: if (y∈Cov(x))OR(preCheckContain(Px,y)ANDTidSet(Px)⊆TidSet(y))then
16: Px←− Px∪y;
17: ConstructtheutilitylistofPxy,UL(Pxy);
18: if (SUM(UL(Pxy).iutils+SUM(UL(Pxy).rutils)<minutil)then
19: passed = false;
20: break;
21: endif
22: else
23: postSetNew←− postSetNew∪y;
24: endif
25: endfor
26: if passed =truethen
27: if SUM(UL(Pxy).iutils>minutilthen
28: OutputPxy;
29: endif
30: PreSet(Pxy)←− PreSet(P);
31: PostSet(Pxy)←− postSetNew;
32: Search-CHUI(Pxy,PreSet(Pxy),PostSet(Pxy),EUCS D );
33: endif
34: PreSet(P)←− PreSet(P)∪x;
35: endif
36: endif
37: endfor
Front.Comput.Sci.
17
items, which can be appended to Pxy to generate potential utilityofitemsetsandidentifyonlythehighutilityitemsets.
CHUIs. This variable is initialized to the empty set. A Having established that the search procedure of the
variablename passed isalsousedtomarkanextensionPxy algorithm can find all itemsets that are closed and
as a potential closed high utility itemset (lines 6-7). Before high-utility, we must lastly show that the various pruning
constructing the utility-list of Pxy, the algorithm checks if techniques used in CLS-Miner to enhance its performance
the two following conditions are satisfied: (i) con(Px,y) is do not prune high utility itemsets. The basic pruning
no less than minutil (lines 9-11), and (ii) x and y co-occur strategyusedinCLS-MinerisProperty4. Thispropertywas
and pass the pruning condition of the Chain-EUCP strategy demonstrated to prune only low utility itemsets in previous
(lines 12-14). If these conditions are satisfied, the search work [9]. Moreover, the CLS-Miner also integrates three
procedurechecksifthecoveragerelationisrespectedandif novel pruning strategies presented in Section 4. These
ybelongstotheclosureofPx(line15). Then,theutility-list strategiesarebasedonProperties8,11and13,respectively.
of Pxy is constructed (line 17). If the sum of the iutil and These properties have been proven to be correct in Section
rutil values in the utility-list of Pxy is less than minutil, it 4.1,4.2and4.3,respectively.
means that Pxy and its transitive extensions are low utility Lastly,itshouldbenotedthatthenovelpre-checkmethod
itemsets. Hence, thesearchprocedurestopsaddingitemsto for fast subsumption checking and closure computation,
Pxytonotgenerateitsextensions(lines18-20). Otherwise,y proposed in Section 4.4, is correct and has no influence on
isaddedtopostSetNew(line22). IfPxyisapotentialclosed theoutput(byProperty15).
highutilityitemsetanditsutilityisnolessthanminutil,itis Hence, based on the above discussion, it can be
output (lines 26-29). The Search-CHUI procedure is then concludedthattheproposedCLS-Mineralgorithmiscorrect
recursively called to continue exploring the search space andcompleteforminingallclosedhighutilityitemsets.
(line 32). Lastly, the item x is added to PreSet(P) (line 34). (cid:3)
When the proposed algorithm terminates, all the CHUIs in
the database have been obtained. We next prove that the
algorithmiscorrectandcomplete. 5.2 ComplexityofCLS-Miner
This subsection analyzes the complexity of the proposed
Theorem 1 The proposed CLS-Miner algorithm is correct
CLS-Mineralgorithmbyfirstconsideringeachmainstepof
andcompletetomineallclosedhighutilityitemsets.
the algorithm. Then, the global worst-case complexity of
CLS-Miner is discussed, and it is compared with the
Proof To demonstrate that the algorithm finds all and only
complexity of the state-of-the-art CHUD and CHUI-Miner
the closed high utility itemsets, we must first show that the
algorithms.
algorithmcanfindallcloseditemsets. Thisisclearsincethe
proposed algorithm adopts the search procedure of the 1. Calculating the TWU of single items. The
DCI_CLOSED algorithm [22] for closed itemset mining. CLS-Miner algorithm first calculates the TWU values
This procedure is also employed by the CHUD [20] and of all items. This requires a single database scan, and
CHUI-Miner [26] algorithms. Its search space browsing thus takes O(n × w) time, where n is the number of
technique enumerates all possible itemsets. Using the transactionsandwistheaveragetransactionlength.
PostSet set guarantees that the complete set of potential 2. Generating I∗. Then, CLS-Miner stores all items
closed itemsets will be obtained, while the PreSet set having TWU values no less than the minutil threshold
guarantees that all duplicate closed itemsets will be pruned in a list named I∗. This list is then sorted in ascending
by the procedure IsSubsumedCheck(). Hence, the search orderofTWUvalues. Thisoperationtakesintheworst
procedure is correct and complete for finding the closed caseO(mlogm)time,wheremisthenumberofdistinct
itemsetsandeliminatingallnoncloseditemsets[22]. itemsinthedatabase.
Then, we must show that the algorithm finds all itemsets 3. Constructing the utility-lists of items in I∗ .
that are high utility itemsets. To calculate the utilities of Thereafter, CLS-Miner builds the utility-list of each
itemsets, the CLS-Miner algorithm employs the utility-list item in I∗. The utility-list of an item contains an entry
structure and Property 3 [9]. It was previously shown that with three fields for each transaction where the item
this property is correct for calculating the utility of appears. In the worst-case, each item appears in all
itemsets [9]. Thus, CLS-Miner can correctly calculate the transactions. Thus,theworst-casespacecomplexityfor
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
18
the initial utility-lists is O(|I∗| × m). Building these CLS-Miner. Among all the operations performed by
initial utility-lists requires a single database scan, and CLS-Miner, the discovery of CHUIs using the
thus takes O(n×w) time. Constructing the utility-lists Search-CHUI() procedure is by far the most costly in terms
of each k-itemset (k > 1) using the utility-list of execution time. Other operations such as calculating the
constructionprocedure(Algorithm1)canbeperformed TWUofitems,generatingI∗,creatingtheinitialutility-lists,
inlineartime [9]. and constructing the Coverage relation are generally not
4. ConstructingtheEUCSstructure. Anotherimportant costlyandhaveanegligibleimpactontheoverallruntimeof
stepoftheCLS-MineralgorithmistobuildtheEUCS. CLS-Minersincetheseoperationsareonlyperformedonce.
This operation is very fast as it also requires a single Having discussed the complexity of the proposed
database scan. Furthermore, this structure occupies a algorithm,thisparagraphbrieflydiscussesthecomplexityof
smallamountofmemoryboundedby|I∗|×|I∗|. Butin the state-of-the-art CHUD [20] and CHUI-Miner [26]
practice, the size of this structure is much less because algorithms. CHUD is a two-phase algorithm. In the first
usually a limited number of pairs of items co-occur in phase, CHUD finds candidate closed high utility itemsets
real-life transaction databases (see Section 6). Thus, usingadepth-firstsearch. Intheworst-case,noitemsetsare
this structure can be implemented as a sparse matrix pruned and CHUD visits all itemsets in the search space,
rather than a full triangular matrix. In our which has roughly a time complexity of O(2|I|). Then,
implementation, the EUCS is implemented as a hash CHUD calculates the exact utility of each candidate in the
map, where each entry has an item x as key, and second phase by scanning the database to eliminate low
anotherhashmapasvalue,whichmapseachitemythat utility itemsets. This process has a worst-case time
co-occurswithxtothevalueTWU(xy). complexity of O(|I| × n × w × v), where v is the average
5. Constructing the Coverage relation. Another itemset length, since each itemset must be compared with
operation performed by CLS-Miner is to calculate the each transaction. Thus, the worst-case time complexity of
coverageofitemsinI∗usingtheEUCSstructure. Inthe CHUD is roughly O(2|I|). Similarly, it can also be
worst case, each item is compared with each item, and established that the worst time-complexity of
each item appears in all transactions. Thus, the worst CHUI-Miner[26]isalsoroughlyO(2|I|).
case time complexity of this operation is O(|I∗|2 ×m2). Although a worst-case time complexity of O(2|I|) may
However, in practice there is a limited number of pairs seems high, it is the typical complexity of efficient
of items that co-occur in transactions having the same algorithms in the field of itemset mining, since the number
TWU.Thus,calculatingthecoverageisveryfast. of operations usually depends on the number of itemsets in
6. Discovering all CHUIs. The last major operation the search space, which depends on the threshold value set
performedbyCLS-MineristhediscoveryofallCHUIs by the user [3,4]. But in practice, the search space is often
by recursively applying the Search-CHUI() procedure. much smaller than 2|I| − 1 itemsets since not all items
Thecomplexityofthisprocedureisproportionaltothe co-occur in a database. In the experimental evaluation
numberoftimesthattheIsSubsumedCheck()procedure sectionofthispaper,itwillbedemonstratedthatinpractice
is called, which is proportional to the number of the CLS-Miner algorithm outperforms the CHUD [20] and
itemsets in the search space that are not pruned by the CHUI-Miner [26] algorithms on six benchmark datasets.
algorithm. Intheworstcase,noitemsetsareprunedby One of the main reason is that CLS-Miner integrates novel
the pruning strategies and thus all the subsets of |I∗| pruning strategies allowing to prune a larger part of the
mustbeconsideredbythealgorithm. Thereare2I∗ −1 search space. More specifically, the proposed Chain-EUCP
subsets. Thus,theworstcasecomplexityisO(2|I∗|−1). and LBP strategies pruned up to 92.5% of the candidate
CHUIs in our experiments. Thus, although the worst-case
Therefore,theworstcasetimecomplexityoftheCLS-Miner time complexity is roughly the same for the three
algorithm(Algorithm5)is O(2|I∗|), whichisroughly O(2|I|). algorithms, CLS-Miner has to process less itemsets in the
It can thus be said that CLS-Miner is a pseudo-polynomial searchspace. Otherreasonsfortheexcellentperformanceof
algorithm since its time complexity is roughly linear with CLS-Miner is that it incorporates a novel fast pre-check
thenumberofpatternsthatitvisitsinthesearchspace. The method, and that it also performs a single phase, thus
number of patterns in the search space is determined by the avoiding the drawback of two-phase algorithms such as
effectiveness of the pruning strategies employed by CHUD[20].
Front.Comput.Sci.
19
Table4 Utility-listsofpromisingitems
f g d b
Tid iutil rutil Tid iutil rutil Tid iutil rutil Tid iutil rutil
3 5 25 2 5 22 1 2 6 3 4 9
5 2 9 3 12 13 4 8 6
4 6 14 5 4 5
a e c
Tid iutil rutil Tid iutil rutil Tid iutil rutil
1 5 1 2 6 6 1 1 0
2 10 12 3 3 1 2 6 0
3 5 4 4 3 3 3 1 0
5 3 2 4 3 0
5 2 0
5.3 Anillustrativeexample PreSet is empty and thus f is not subsumed by any
items. Then, the algorithm considers appending items to
To give a better understanding of how the proposed
f to compute its closure. The set PostSet of the closed
algorithm works, this subsection provides a detailed
itemset beginning with f is initialized to the empty set.
exampleofhowtheCLS-Mineralgorithmisappliedforthe
Then, items are appended to f to try to generate the
running example. Consider the database D of the running
closure of f. Before appending an item to f, pruning
example depicted in Table 1, the corresponding unit profit
conditions are checked to determine if the resulting
values of items (Table 2), and that minutil = 30 (or
itemset could be a high utility itemset. In this example,
equivalently r_minutil = 31%). Mining closed high utility
thealgorithmfirstconsidersappendinggto f togenerate
itemsetsusingCLS-Minerisdoneasfollows.
the itemset fg. The conditions are checked, and fg is
1. Thedatabase DisscannedtocalculatetheTWUofeach
pruned by the Chain-EUCP strategy, because there is a
item. TheresultisshowninTable3.
tuple(f,g,0)inthe EUCS ,whichmeansthatthesetwo
D
2. ThelistI∗,ofsinglepromisingitemsiscreated,andsorted
items do not co-occur in the database. Then, the
in ascending order of TWU values. The result is I∗ =
algorithm considers appending d to f to create the
{f,g,d,b,a,e,c}.
itemset fd. That itemset is not pruned by the LBP
3. The database D is scanned again to construct the utility- strategy(sincecon(fd)=30-0×30=30=minutil)and
listofeachsingleitemin I∗ (Table4)andthe EUCS is
D the Chain-EUCP strategy. Then, because d is in the
built(depictedinFig. 1).
coverage of f (Table 5), the utility-list of fd is
4. The coverage of each promising item is calculated constructed, that is ul(fd) = {(T ,17,13)}. Because
3
(Table5). sum(ul(fd).iutils) + sum(ul(fd).rutils) = 17 + 13 = 30 =
minutil, fd is considered as a potential high utility
Table5 Thesetofpromisingitemswiththeirsupportcountsandcoverage itemset (a candidate). CLS-Miner next considers
1-itemset(P) {f} {g} {d} {b} {a} {e} {c} appending b,a,e, and c in the same way. This results in
coverage(P) {d,b,a,e,c} {e,c} {c} {e,c} {c} {c}
the closed high utility itemset fdbaec, having the
sup(P) 1 2 2 3 3 3 4
utility-list ul(fdbaec) = {(T ,30,0)}. Because the utility
3
of the itemset fdbaec is 30, which is no less than the
5. The Search-CHUI procedure begins its recursive search
minutilthreshold, itisaclosedhighutilityitemsetandit
forCHUIsusingitem f. ThesetPreSetisinitiallyempty
is output. Then, f is added to the set PreSet(f) and
and PostSet = {g,d,b,a,e,c}. The procedure explores PostSet(fdbaec)=∅. Theloopwithitem f ends.
the search space of closed high utility itemsets that are
6. Next,CLS-Minersearchesforclosedhighutilityitemsets
supersetsof f byappendingitemsfromthePostSetto f.
starting with item g. This process is similar to Step 5,
According to the utility list of f (shown in Table 4), the with PreSet={f} and PostSet={d,b,a,e,c}. The sum of
sumoftheiutilandrutilvaluesof f isequalto30,which theiutilandrutilvaluesoful(g)is(7+31=38)>30=
is no less than minutil. Thus, extensions of f should be
minutil. Then, it is found that g is not subsumed by the
considered as potential high utility itemsets. Since no
already mined CHUI fdbaec. Thus, the algorithm
item precedes f according to the total order (cid:31), the set
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
20
considersextendingg. Theextensiongd failstopassthe given in Table 6, where #Trans, #Items, and #Avg
test of the Chain-EUCP strategy, and it is thus pruned. respectivelyindicatethenumberoftransactions,thenumber
The extensions gb and ga are also pruned in the same of distinct items and the average transaction length,
way. Next,thealgorithmconsidersappendingitemetog. respectively. The Mushroom, Retail, Chess and Connect
The resulting itemset ge is not pruned by the two datasets were obtained from the FIMI Repository [36]. The
strategies, and it is found that e belongs to the coverage Foodmart dataset is the Microsoft foodmart 2000
of g. The utility-list of ge is then constructed, that is database[37],andtheChainStoredatasetwasobtainedfrom
ul(ge) = {(T ,17,10)(T ,5,6))}. Becausegemayleadto theNUMineBenchsoftwaredistribution[38].
2 5
a closed itemset, it is extended with item c in the same The datasets have been selected because they include
way. The utility-list of the itemset gec is ul(gec) = bothdense,sparse,andlargedatasets,andthusrepresentthe
{(T ,17,10)(T ,7,4)}. However, u(gec) = 24 main types of data seen in real-life applications. These
2 5
< minutil = 30, and thus gec is not a closed high utility datasets are also the main benchmark datasets used in the
itemset. Then,PreSet(gec)={f,g},PostSet(gec)=∅,and high utility itemset mining literature. All datasets except
theloopforgends. Foodmart and ChainStore do not include internal and
7. The remaining items are processed in the same way. external utility values. Thus, for these datasets, the internal
Finally, the set of closed high utility itemsets is CH = and external utilities have been respectively generated
{abcdef:30,bcde:40,bce:31,ace:31},wherethenumber randomly in the [1, 5] and [1, 10] intervals using a
besideseachitemsetindicatesitsutility. log-normaldistribution,asinpreviousworks[20,26].
6.1 EvaluationoftheChain-EUCPstrategy
Table6 Detailsofthedatasets
Dataset #Trans #Items #Avg Type Thefirstexperimentwasperformedtoevaluatetheproposed
Mushroom 8124 119 23.0 Dense Chain-EUCP strategy. In this experiment, CLS-Miner with
Chess 3196 75 37 Dense
the Chain-EUCP strategy (denoted as CLS-Miner ) was
Connect 67,557 129 43.0 Dense CE
Retail 88,162 16,470 10.3 Sparse compared with a version of CLS-Miner without the
Foodmart 4141 1559 4.4 Sparse
Chain-EUCP strategy (denoted as CLS-Miner ). The
ChainStore 1,112,949 46,086 7.3 Sparse NoCE
algorithms were run on the Retail, ChainStore, Chess, and
Connectdatasets. Theparameterminutilwasvariedandthe
number of candidates generated by the two versions of
CLS-Miner was measured. Table 7 indicates the number of
6 Experimentalevaluation
candidates generated by CLS-Miner and CLS-Miner
CE NoCE
This section presents an extensive experimental evaluation ontheRetailandChainStoredatasets. ResultsfortheChess
to assess the performance of the proposed CLS-Miner andConnectdatasetsareprovidedinTable8.
algorithm,includingitspruningstrategiesandthepre-check
method for fast subsumption checks and closure Table7 NumberofcandidatesgeneratedbyCLS-Minerwith/withoutthe
computations. The performance of CLS-Miner is compared Chain-EUCPstrategyonsparsedatasets
to the state-of-the-art CHUI-Miner [26] and CHUD [20] Minimum Retail ChainStore
utility(%) CLS- CLS- CLS- CLS-
algorithms for CHUI mining. CHUI-Miner was recently
MinerNoCE MinerCE MinerNoCE MinerCE
proposed for mining closed high utility itemsets, and it was
0.1 4,643,301 3,058,464 1,397,708 105,537
shown to outperform the two-phase CHUD 0.08 7,167,652 5,212,220 3,761,895 597,633
algorithm [20, 26]. Experiments were performed on a 0.06 10,923,546 8,589,355 9,916,894 3,086,107
0.04 18,225,180 15,358,692 26,304,356 13,457,757
computer equipped with a 64 bit Core i5, 2.4 GHz Intel 0.02 36,600,558 32,485,724 75,824,402 54,537,511
Processor and 8 GB of RAM, running Windows 7 SP1 0.01 78,485,602 69,048,615 158,501,880 130,304,550
64-bit as operating system. All the compared algorithms
wereimplementedbyextendingtheSPMFopen-sourcejava It can be observed that this strategy is quite effective on
library [35] and ran on the J2SDK 1.7.0. Both real and sparse datasets. Furthermore, it can be observed that when
synthetic datasets were used in the experiments. The minutil is set to small values, few candidates are pruned.
characteristics of the datasets used in the experiments are This is reasonable since less pairs of items in the EUCS
Front.Comput.Sci.
21
Table8 NumberofcandidatesgeneratedbyCLS-Minerwith/withoutthe Table10 NumberofcandidatesgeneratedbyCLS-Minerwith/withoutthe
Chain-EUCPstrategyondensedatasets LBPstrategyondensedatasets
Minimum Chess Connect Minimum Chess Connect
utility(%) CLS- CLS- CLS- CLS- utility(%) CLS- CLS- CLS- CLS-
MinerNoCE MinerCE MinerNoCE MinerCE MinerNoLbp MinerLbp MinerNoLbp MinerLbp
50 0 0 0 0 50 0 0 0 0
40 587 500 31 16 40 873 500 140 16
30 22,828 22,625 1,097 1,051 30 23,148 22,625 1,385 1,051
20 2,650,790 2,650,589 17,479 17,406 20 2,651,131 2,650,589 17,801 17,406
10 49,493,242 49,492,939 4,359,633 4,359,126 10 49,501,084 49,492,939 4,359,928 4,359,126
structure meet the condition EUCS(x,y) < minutil when 6.3 Evaluationofpruningeffectiveness
minutil is set to a small value. Thus, less candidates are
pruned. However,theChain-EUCPstrategyisveryeffective
The influence of the two main pruning strategies
and using this strategy, CLS-Miner considers up to 92%
CE Chain-EUCP and LBP on the overall execution time of
lesscandidatesthanCLS-Miner .
NoCE CLS-Miner was also evaluated. Fig. 2 shows the execution
timeswheneachpruningstrategyisappliedindividuallyand
whenbothstrategiesareappliedtogetherinCLS-Miner. The
6.2 EvaluationoftheLBPstrategy performanceoftheChain-EUCPandLBPstrategiesvaryfor
different datasets. But overall, it can be observed that the
The second experiment was conducted to evaluate the Chain-EUCP strategy is more effective than the LBP
effectiveness of the proposed LBP strategy at pruning the strategy on sparse datasets, and that the overall best
search space. This experiment was carried on the performance is obtained when combining both pruning
ChainStore, Retail, Chess, and Connect datasets. A version strategies for all datasets. The above analysis confirms the
of CLS-Miner with the LBP strategy (denoted as
effectivenessoftheproposedpruningstrategies.
CLS-Miner )wascomparedwithaversionofCLS-Miner
Lbp
withouttheLBPstrategy(denotedasCLS-Miner ). The
NoLbp
parameter minutil was varied and the number of candidates 2500
was measured for the two versions of CLS-Miner. Table 9 2000
compares the number of candidates generated by 1500
CLS-Miner and CLS-Miner on the ChainStore and
Lbp NoLbp 1000
Retail datasets, which are both sparse datasets. Results for
500
the dense Chess and Connect datasets are provided in
0
0.1 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.02 0.01
Table 10. These results show that candidate pruning using
the LBP strategy can be very effective as it can prune up to
92.5%ofthecandidates.
Table9 NumberofcandidatesgeneratedbyCLS-Minerwith/withoutthe
LBPstrategyonsparsedatasets
Minimum Retail ChainStore
utility(%) CLS- CLS- CLS- CLS-
MinerNoLbp MinerLbp MinerNoLbp MinerLbp
0.1 4,652,729 3,058,464 1,409,186 105,537
0.08 7,178,729 5,212,220 3,785,342 597,633
0.06 10,933,113 8,589,355 9,964,155 3,086,107
0.04 18,250,665 15,385,692 26,397,614 13,457,757
0.02 36,639,799 32,485,724 75,849,670 54,537,511
0.01 78,591,959 69,048,615 158,728,749 130,304,550
).ces(
emitnuR
Chain-EUCP LBP Chain-EUCP + LBP CHUI-Miner
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0.1 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.02 0.01
Relative minimum utility (%)
(a) Retail
).ces(
emitnuR
Chain-EUCP LBP Chain-EUCP + LBP CHUI-Miner
Relative minimum utility (%)
(b) ChainStore
20000
18000
16000
14000 12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
50 40 30 20 10
).ces(
emitnuR
Chain-EUCP LBP Chain-EUCP + LBP CHUI-Miner
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
90 70 50 30 20
Relative minimum utility (%)
(c) Chess
).ces(
emitnuR
Chain-EUCP LBP Chain-EUCP + LBP CHUI-Miner
Relative minimum utility (%)
(d) Connect
Fig.2 Effectofpruningstrategies
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
22
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
).ces(
emitnuR
CLS-Miner_NoPreCheck CLS-Miner
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
50 40 30 20 10
Relative minimum utility (%)
(a) Mushroom
).ces(
emitnuR
CLS-Miner_NoPreCheck CLS-Miner
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
90 80 70 60 50 40 30
Relative minimum utility (%)
(b) Chess
).ces(
emitnuR
CLS-Miner_NoPreCheck CLS-Miner
Relative minimum utility (%)
(c) Connect
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0.1 0.090.080.070.060.050.040.030.020.01
).ces(
emitnuR
CLS-Miner_NoPreCheck CLS-Miner
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Relative minimum utility (%)
(d) Retail
).ces(
emitnuR
CLS-Miner_NoPreCheck CLS-Miner
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0.1 0.09 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02
Relative minimum utility (%)
(e) Foodmart
).ces(
emitnuR
CLS-Miner_NoPreCheck CLS-Miner
Relative minimum utility (%)
(f) ChainStore
Fig.3 RuntimeofCLS-Minerwith/withoutpreCheckContainmethod
6.4 Evaluation of the pre-check method for subsumption 6.5 Efficiencyoftheproposedalgorithm
checkingandclosurecomputation
This section compares the efficiency of the proposed
CLS-Miner algorithm with CHUD [20] and
CHUI-Miner [26] on the six datasets. CHUD is the first
algorithm for mining CHUIs. CHUD includes three
Theeffectivenessoftheproposedpre-checkmethodforfast strategiesnamedREG,RML,andDCMthatgreatlyenhance
subsumption checks and closure computations was also itsperformance. However,CHUDisatwo-phasealgorithm.
evaluated. Recall that a subsumption check consists of Therefore, itgeneratesahugenumberofcandidates, andits
determiningifanitemsetisincludedinacloseditemsetthat repeatedlyscansthedatabasetocalculatetheirexactutilities
has already been found, and that closure computation as mentioned above. CHUI-Miner [26] is a one-phase
consists of calculating the closure of an itemset. As algorithm that relies on the utility-list structure [9] to mine
mentioned, most closed itemset mining algorithms CHUIs. A drawback of CHUI-Miner is that it has to fully
repeatedly perform subsumption checking and closure construct the utility-lists of all the itemsets in its search
computation. Thus,itiscrucialtooptimizetheseoperations. space, and this is a costly operation. The proposed
Anexperimentwascarriedouttoassesstheefficiencyofthe CLS-Miner algorithm addresses this drawback by
proposed pre-check method to optimize these two introducing three strategies to prune low utility itemsets
operations. We prepared another version of the proposed before their utility-lists are constructed. CLS-Miner is a
algorithm,namedCLS-Miner ,wherethepre-check one-phase algorithm, too. Therefore, we first compare the
NoPreCheck
method used for subsumption checking and closure number of utility-list construction operations (candidates)
computation is deactivated. A comparison of the execution performed by CHUI-Miner and the proposed CLS-Miner
timesofbothversionsofthealgorithmisshowninFig.3for algorithm. Then, a comparison of runtimes and memory
the same datasets. It can be seen in this figure that the consumption of the three algorithms for mining CHUIs is
optimizedversionisupto50%moreefficient. provided.
Front.Comput.Sci.
23
250
200
150
100
50
0
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
)dnasuoht(
setadidnaC
fo
rebmuN
Mushroom
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
50 40 30 20 10
Relative minimum utility (%)
CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
(a) Mushroom
)noillim(
setadidnaC
fo rebmuN
Chess
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
90 80 70 60 50 40 30
Relative minimum utility (%)
CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
(b) Chess
)dnasuoht(
setadidnaC
fo
rebmuN
Connect
Relative minimum utility (%)
CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
(c) Connect
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.1 0.09 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01
)noillim(
setadidnaC
fo
rebmuN
Retail
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.1 0.090.080.070.060.050.040.030.020.010.005
Relative minimum utility (%)
CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
(d) Retail
)noillim(
setadidnaC
fo
rebmuN
Foodmart
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.1 0.09 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01
Relative minimum utility (%)
CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
(e) Foodmart
)noillim(
setadidnaC
fo
rebmuN
Chain Store
Relative minimum utility (%)
CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
(f) ChainStore
Fig.4 ComparisonofthenumberofcandidatesgeneratedbyCHUI-MinerandCLS-Miner
The number of candidates generated by the CHUI-Miner theirutilities,whichtakesalotoftime. CHUI-Miner[26]is
and CLS-Miner algorithms are compared in Fig. 4. It can a single-phase algorithm as the proposed CLS-Miner
be observed that the proposed algorithm can generate much algorithm. However, the proposed CLS-Miner algorithm
less candidates than CHUI-Miner, especially on sparse and relies on three novel effective pruning strategies which can
largedatasetssuchasChainStore. Thenumberofcandidates prune a large part of the search space. Furthermore, the
produced by the proposed algorithm is about two orders of CLS-Miner algorithm also employs the efficient pre-check
magnitudessmallerthanthatofCHUI-Miner. method to quickly perform subsumption checks and closure
computations, which considerably reduces its execution
A comparison of the execution times of the CHUD, time.
CHUI-Miner and CLS-Miner algorithms is presented in
Fig. 5. Execution times include the time for reading the Table 11 compares the peak memory usage of the three
input database, discovering the patterns, and writing the algorithmsforthesixdatasetswhentheminutilthresholdis
CHUIs to an output file. Results show that the proposed set to the smallest values used in the previous experiment.
CLS-Miner algorithm is faster than both CHUD and All memory measurements were done using the standard
CHUI-Miner. When the minutil threshold is set to large Java API. By consulting this table, it can be found that
values, the runtimes of the compared algorithm are quite CHUD consumes the most memory among the three
similar. However, for small values of the minutil threshold, algorithms, on all datasets. The CHUI-Miner and
there is a big gap between the proposed algorithm and the CLS-Miner algorithms consume the same amount of
two previous state-of-the-art algorithms. The reason is the memory on the Foodmart dataset. For the remaining
following. CHUD [20] is a two-phase algorithm. Hence it datasets, the proposed algorithm slightly consumes more
suffers from the problem of generating a huge number of memory than CHUI-Miner. CHUI-Miner and CLS-Miner
candidatesandrepeatedlyscanningthedatabasetocalculate are single phase algorithms that do not need to maintain
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
24
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
).ces(
emitnuR
CHUD CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
50 40 30 20 10
Relative minimum utility (%)
(a) Mushroom
).ces(
emitnuR
CHUD CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
100000
10000
1000
100
10
1
90 80 70 60 50 40 30
Relative minimum utility (%)
(b) Chess
).ces(
emitnuR
CHUD CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
Relative minimum utility (%)
(c) Connect
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
0.1 0.09 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01
).ces(
emitnuR
CHUD CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Relative minimum utility (%)
(d) Retail
).ces(
emitnuR
CHUD CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
0.1 0.09 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01
Relative minimum utility (%)
(e) Foodmart
).ces(
emitnuR
CHUD CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
Relative minimum utility (%)
(f) ChainStore
Fig.5 Runtimecomparisonondifferentdatasets
candidates in memory. However, CLS-Miner needs to store transactionswasvariedfrom100Kto500K.Fig.6(a)shows
otherstructuresinmemoryforitspruningstrategiessuchas the runtimes of the algorithms on the T10I4NXKD100K
the EUCS and the coverage of items. Hence, considering datasetwhenthenumberofdistinctitemsisvariedfrom2K
this, it can be concluded that CLS-Miner has reasonable to 10K. Fig. 6(b) shows the runtimes of the compared
performanceintermsofmemoryusage. algorithms on T10I4N4KDXK when the database size is
varied from 100K to 500K transactions. It can be observed
Table11 Comparisonofmaximummemoryconsumption(MB) that the proposed algorithm has linear scalability with
respect to the number of items and the number of
Dataset CHUD CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
Mushroom 318.7 266.1 329.8 transactions.
Chess 749.6 134.4 140
Inconclusion,thepreviouslydescribedexperimentsshow
Connect 1,967.8 536 620
Retail 390.4 282 305.2
thattheproposedmethodsarehighlyeffectiveandtheCLS-
Foodmart 277.8 169.1 169.1
MineroutperformsCHUDandCHUI-Miner.
ChainStore 2,698.5 1,259.6 1,402.3
7 Conclusionandfuturework
6.6 Scalabilityevaluation
We also performed experiments to assess the scalability of In this study, we have introduced an efficient algorithm
the proposed algorithm on a synthetic dataset named CLS-Miner for mining closed high utility itemsets.
T10I4NXKDYK, where the number of transactions Y and The proposed algorithm relies on the utility-list structure to
thenumberofitemsXwerevaried. Forthisexperiment,the discoverpatternsinonephase. Moreover,toreducethecost
valueoftheminutilthresholdwasfixedto0.5%,thenumber of utility-list intersection operations of utility-list based
of items was varied from 2K to 10K, and the number of algorithms,CLS-Minerintroducesseveralnovelideas. First,
Front.Comput.Sci.
25
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2K 4K 6K 8K 10K
).ces(
emitnuR
CHUD CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
100K 200K 300K 400K 500K
Number of distinct items
(a) Variednumberofitems
).ces(
emitnuR
CHUD CHUI-Miner CLS-Miner
Number of transactions
(b) Varieddatasetsizes
Fig.6 Scalabilityofthecomparedalgorithmsunderdifferentparametersettings
an improved pruning strategy name Chain-EUCP based on
the estimated utility of pairs of items was introduced.
Second, an efficient Lower Branch Pruning strategy was Acknowledgements
proposed to reduce the search space by pruning low utility
transitive extensions of itemsets. Third, a novel concept
The research was funded by the National Natural Science
named Coverage was presented to quickly discover the
Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 61133005, 61432005,
closure of itemsets and prune low utility items. These
61370095, 61472124, 61202109, and 61472126), and the
strategiescanpruneitemsetswithoutfullyconstructingtheir
International Science & Technology Cooperation Program
utility-lists. Lastly, a fast pre-check method was introduced
of China (Grant No. 2015DFA11240 and 2014DFBS0010).
to quickly perform closure computations and subsumption
T-L. Dam was also partially supported by the science
checks. This method is useful for the problem of mining
research fund of Hanoi University of Industry, Hanoi,
closedhighutilityitemsets.
Vietnam.
An extensive experimental evaluation was conducted to
evaluate the proposed CLS-Miner algorithm and the CompliancewithEthicalStandards
proposed techniques introduced in this algorithm. Results
have shown that CLS-Miner and its techniques are highly
Funding: ThisresearchwasfundedbytheNationalNatural
efficient. In particular, the Chain-EUCP and the LBP
Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 61133005,
strategies can prune up to 93% of candidates and the
61432005, 61370095, 61472124, 61202109, and61472126)
pre-check method can reduce the total runtime by up to
and the International Science & Technology Cooperation
50%. Intermsofruntime,CLS-Minerisuptoseveralorders
Program of China (Grant No. 2015DFA11240 and
ofmagnitudefasterthanexistingmethodsforminingclosed
2014DFBS0010). T-L.Damwasalsopartiallysupportedby
high utility itemsets. A scalability experiment has also
the science research fund of Hanoi University of Industry,
shown that the algorithm has linear scalability with respect
Hanoi,Vietnam.
tothenumberofitemsandthenumberoftransactions.
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that they have no
conflictofinterest.
In recent years, big data as emerged as an important
research topic. Therefore, it is our plan to develop a Ethical approval: This article does not contain any studies
distributed version of CLS-Miner that can be run on withhumanparticipantsoranimalsperformedbyanyofthe
cloud-computingplatforms,forprocessinghugedatasets. authors.
Thu-LanDAMetal.CLS-Miner:efficientandeffectiveclosedhighutilityitemsetmining
26
forestalgorithmforbigdatainasparkcloudcomputingenvironment.
IEEETransactionsonParallelandDistributedSystems,2016,PP(99):
References 1–1
18. SongW,LiuY,LiJ.Mininghighutilityitemsetsbydynamicallyprun-
ingthetreestructure.AppliedIntelligence,2014,40(1):29–43
1. AgrawalR,SrikantR. Fastalgorithmsforminingassociationrules.
19. Fournier-Viger P, Lin J C W, Duong Q H, Dam T L. In: Fujita H,
VLDB,1994,487–499
AliM,SelamatA,SasakiJ,KurematsuM,eds. FHM+:FasterHigh-
2. ZakiMJ,GoudaK.Fastverticalminingusingdiffsets.In:Proceedings
UtilityItemsetMiningUsingLengthUpper-BoundReduction.Cham:
oftheNinthACMSIGKDDInternationalConferenceonKnowledge
SpringerInternationalPublishing,2016,115–127
DiscoveryandDataMining.2003,326–335
20. TsengVS,WuCW,Fournier-VigerP,YuPS.Efficientalgorithmsfor
3. HanJW,PeiJ,YinYW. Miningfrequentpatternswithoutcandi-
miningtheconciseandlosslessrepresentationofhighutilityitemsets.
dategeneration: Afrequent-patterntreeapproach. DataMiningand
IEEETransactionsonKnowledgeandDataEngineering,2015,27(3):
KnowledgeDiscovery,2004,8(1):53–87
726–739
4. HanJ,WangJ,LuY,TzvetkovP. Miningtop-kfrequentclosedpat-
21. PasquierN,BastideY,TaouilR,LakhalL. Efficientminingofasso-
ternswithoutminimumsupport. In:DataMining,2002.ICDM2003.
ciationrulesusingcloseditemsetlattices.InformationSystems,1999,
Proceedings.2002IEEEInternationalConferenceon.2002,211–218
24(1):25–46
5. GrahneG,ZhuJ.Fastalgorithmsforfrequentitemsetminingusingfp-
22. LuccheseC,OrlandoS,PeregoR.Fastandmemoryefficientminingof
trees. IEEETransactionsonKnowledgeandDataEngineering,2005,
frequentcloseditemsets. IEEETransactionsonKnowledgeandData
17(10):1347–1362
Engineering,2006,18(1):21–36
6. DengZH,LvSL. PrePost+: AnefficientN-lists-basedalgorithm
23. ZakiMJ,HsiaoCJ. Efficientalgorithmsforminingcloseditemsets
forminingfrequentitemsetsviaChildren-ParentEquivalencepruning.
andtheirlatticestructure. IEEETransactionsonKnowledgeandData
ExpertSystemswithApplications,2015,42(13):5424–5432
Engineering,2005,17(4):462–478
7. DamTL,LiK,Fournier-VigerP,DuongQH. Anefficientalgorithm
24. Fournier-VigerP.FHN:EfficientMiningofHigh-UtilityItemsetswith
forminingtop-rank-kfrequentpatterns. AppliedIntelligence,2016,
NegativeUnitProfits. In: AdvancedDataMiningandApplications,
45(1):96–111
volume8933ofLectureNotesinComputerScience,16–29.Springer
8. LiuY,LiaoWk,ChoudharyA. Atwo-phasealgorithmforfastdis-
InternationalPublishing,2014
coveryofhighutilityitemsets.In:AdvancesinKnowledgeDiscovery
25. TsengV,WuCW,Fournier-VigerP,YuP. Efficientalgorithmsfor
andDataMining,volume3518ofLectureNotesinComputerScience,
miningtop-khighutilityitemsets. IEEETransactionsonKnowledge
689–695.SpringerBerlinHeidelberg,2005
andDataEngineering,2016,28(1):54–67
9. LiuM,QuJ. Mininghighutilityitemsetswithoutcandidategenera-
26. WuCW,Fournier-VigerP,GuJY,TsengVS. Miningclosed+high
tion. In: Proceedingsofthe21stACMInternationalConferenceon
utilityitemsetswithoutcandidategeneration. In:2015Conferenceon
InformationandKnowledgeManagement,CIKM’12.2012,55–64
TechnologiesandApplicationsofArtificialIntelligence(TAAI). Nov
10. TsengV,ShieBE,WuCW,YuP. Efficientalgorithmsformining
2015,187–194
highutilityitemsetsfromtransactionaldatabases. IEEETransactions
27. ChanR,YangQ,ShenYD. Mininghighutilityitemsets. In: Third
onKnowledgeandDataEngineering,2013,25(8):1772–1786
IEEEInternationalConferenceonDataMining(ICDM2003). Nov
11. Fournier-VigerP,WuCW,ZidaS,TsengV.FHM:FasterHigh-Utility
2003,19–26
ItemsetMiningUsingEstimatedUtilityCo-occurrencePruning. In:
28. LanGC,HongTP,TsengVS.Anefficientprojection-basedindexing
FoundationsofIntelligentSystems,volume8502ofLectureNotesin
approachformininghighutilityitemsets.KnowledgeandInformation
ComputerScience,83–92.SpringerInternationalPublishing,2014
Systems,2014,38(1):85–107
12. SongW,LiuY,LiJ. BAHUI:FastandMemoryEfficientMiningof
29. GoudaK,ZakiMJ. Genmax:Anefficientalgorithmforminingmax-
HighUtilityItemsetsBasedonBitmap. InternationalJournalofData
imalfrequentitemsets.DataMiningandKnowledgeDiscovery,2005,
WarehousingandMining,2014,10(1):1–15
11(3):223–242
13. SongW,ZhangZ,LiJ. Ahighutilityitemsetminingalgorithmbased
30. UnoT,KiyomiM,ArimuraH. LCMver.2: Efficientminingalgo-
onsubsumeindex.KnowledgeandInformationSystems,2015,1–26
rithmsforfrequent/closed/maximalitemsets.In:FIMI.2004
14. AhmedC,TanbeerS,JeongBS,LeeYK.Efficienttreestructuresfor
31. SzathmaryL,ValtchevP,NapoliA,GodinR,BocA,MakarenkovV.
highutilitypatternmininginincrementaldatabases. IEEETransac-
Afastcompoundalgorithmformininggenerators,closeditemsets,and
tionsonKnowledgeandDataEngineering,2009,21(12):1708–1721
computinglinksbetweenequivalenceclasses. AnnalsofMathematics
15. YangQ. Threechallengesindatamining. FrontiersofComputerSci-
andArtificialIntelligence,2014,70(1-2):81–105
enceinChina,2010,4(3):324–333
32. Fournier-VigerP,WuCW,TsengVS. Novelconciserepresentations
16. ZhouX,LiK,XiaoG,ZhouY,LiK.Topkfavoriteprobabilisticprod-
ofhighutilityitemsetsusinggeneratorpatterns. In: AdvancedData
uctsqueries.IEEETransactionsonKnowledgeandDataEngineering,
MiningandApplications,30–43.Springer,2014
2016,28(10):2808–2821
33. ShieBE,PhilipSY,TsengVS.Efficientalgorithmsforminingmax-
17. ChenJ,LiK,TangZ,BilalK,YuS,WengC,LiK.Aparallelrandom
Front.Comput.Sci.
27
imalhighutilityitemsetsfromdatastreamswithdifferentmodels.Ex- //fimi.cs.helsinki.fi/data/>),2012
pertSystemswithApplications,2012,39(17):12947–12960 37. FoodMart2000, Microsoft Developer Network (MSDN) . Available
34. PasquierN,BastideY,TaouilR,LakhalL.In: Discoveringfrequent at. (<https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/
closeditemsetsforassociationrules.SpringerBerlinHeidelberg,1999, aa217032(v=sql.80)>)
398–416 38. Pisharath J, Liu Y, Liao W K, Choudhary A, Memik G,
35. Fournier-VigerP,GomarizA,GuenicheT,SoltaniA,WuCW,Tseng Parhi J. NU-MineBench 2.0 dataset and technical report.
VS. SPMF:AJavaOpen-SourcePatternMiningLibrary. Journalof (<http://cucis.ece.northwestern.edu/projects/
MachineLearningResearch,2014,15:3569–3573 DMS/MineBench.html>),2005
36. FrequentItemsetsMiningDatasetRepository.Availableat.(<http:
