FOSHU: Faster On-Shelf High Utility Itemset Mining
– with or without Negative Unit Profit
Philippe Fournier-Viger Souleymane Zida
UniversityofMoncton UniversityofMoncton
18Antonine-MailletAve 18Antonine-MailletAve
Moncton,NB,Canada Moncton,NB,Canada
philippe.fournier-viger@umoncton.ca esz2233@umoncton.ca
ABSTRACT orvalue). Toaddresstheselimitations,theproblemofFIM
has been redefined as High-Utility Itemset Mining (HUIM)
Highutility itemset (HUI) miningis apopular datamining
to consider the more general case where items can appear
task, which consists of discovering sets of items generating
morethanonceineachtransactionandwhereeachitemhas
high profit in a transaction database. Recently, several effi-
a weight (e.g. unit profit) [3, 4, 6, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. The
cientalgorithmshavebeenproposedforthistask. But,most
goalofHUIMistodiscoverhighutilityitemsets(HUIs),i.e.
of them do not consider the on-shelf time periods of items,
itemsetsgeneratingahighprofitratherthanfrequentitem-
which thus lead to a bias toward items having more shelf
sets. The problem of HUIM is widely recognized as more
time. Moreover, most algorithms cannot handle databases
difficult than the problem of FIM. In FIM, the downward-
containing items with a negative unit profit, although this
closureproperty statesthatthesupportofanitemsetisanti-
case is very common in real transaction databases. In this
monotonic,thatisthesupersetsofaninfrequentitemsetare
paper, we address both of these challenges by proposing a
infrequent and subsets of a frequent itemset are frequent.
novel efficient algorithm named FOSHU (Faster On-Shelf
This property is very powerful to prune the search space.
High Utility itemset miner) to mine HUIs while consider-
In HUIM, the utility of an itemset is neither monotonic or
ing on-shelf time periods of items, and items having posi-
anti-monotonic,thatisahighutilityitemsetmayhaveasu-
tiveand/ornegativeunitprofit. Anextensiveexperimental
persetorsubsetwithlower,equalorhigherutility[2]. Thus
study with real-life datasets shows that the proposed algo-
techniquestoprunethesearchspacedevelopedinFIMcan-
rithm can be up more than 1000 times faster and use up
not be directly applied in HUIM. Many studies have been
to10timeslessmemorythanthestate-of-the-artalgorithm
carriedtodevelopefficientHUIMalgorithms[3,4,6,12,13,
TS-HOUN for this task. Moreover, experiments show that
15]. However, most of these studies make two assumptions
theproposedalgorithmperformswellondensedatabaseand
that are unrealistic for real transactional databases. First,
databases containing many time periods.
most algorithms cannot handle databases where items may
havenegativeunitprofit/weight. Butsuchitemsoftenoccur
CategoriesandSubjectDescriptors
inreal-lifetransactiondatabases. Forexample,itiscommon
H.2.8 [Database Applications]: Data Mining that a retail store will sell items at a loss to stimulate the
saleofotherrelateditemsorsimplytoattractcustomersto
Keywords their retail location. It was demonstrated that if classical
HUIM algorithms are applied on database containing items
frequentpatternmining,utilitymining,high-utilityitemset with negative unit profit, they can generate an incomplete
mining, on-shelf time periods set of HUIs [1, 7]. Second, most algorithms consider that
items have the same shelf time, i.e. that all item are on
1. INTRODUCTION sale for the same time period. However, in real-life some
FrequentItemsetMining (FIM)[2]isapopulardatamin- items are only sold during some short time period (e.g. the
ing task that is essential to a wide range of applications. summer). Algorithms ignoring the shelf time of items have
Given a transaction database, FIM consists of discovering a bias toward items having more shelf time since they have
frequent itemsets. i.e. groups of items (itemsets) appearing more chance to generate a high profit [9, 10].
frequentlyintransactions[2]. However,itassumesthateach To address these respective limitations the problem of
itemcannotappearmorethanonceineachtransactionand HUIM has been respectively redefined as the problem of
thatallitemshavethesameimportance(weight,unitprofit mining HUIs with negative/positive unit profit [1, 7], and
theproblemofmininghighon-shelfutilityitemsets(HOUs)
[9]. Recently, a more general problem definition addressing
both limitations has been proposed. It is the problem of
Permissiontomakedigitalorhardcopiesofallorpartofthisworkfor
personalorclassroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesare mining HOUs with negative/positive unit profit [10]. The
notmadeordistributedforprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopies state-of-the-art algorithm for this latter problem definition
bearthisnoticeandthefullcitationonthefirstpage.Tocopyotherwise,to is TS-HOUN [9, 10]. Although this algorithm is pioneer,
republish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecific it does not perform well on large or dense databases (as
permissionand/orafee.
shown in our experiment). The reason is that it uses a
SAC’15April13-17,2015,Salamanca,Spain.
Copyright2015ACM ACM978-1-4503-3196-8/15/0415.00 three phase approach that requires generating and main-
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2695664.2695823
Table 1: A Transaction Database Table 2: External Utility Values (Unit Profit)
TID Transactions Period Item a b c d e f g
T 1 (a,1)(c,1)(d,1) 1 Profit -5 2 1 2 3 1 1
T (a,2)(c,6)(e,2)(g,5) 1
2
T (a,1)(b,2)(c,1)(d,6),(e,1),(f,5) 2
3
T (b,4)(c,3)(d,3)(e,1) 2 Definition 2. The utility of an item i ∈ I in a transac-
4
T 5 (b,2)(c,2)(e,1)(g,2) 3 tion T c is denoted as u(i,T c ) and defined as p(i)×q(i,T c ).
The utility of an itemset X (a group of items X ⊆ I) in
(cid:80)
a transaction T is defined as u(X,T ) = u(i,T ). It
c c i∈X c
taining large amount of candidates in memory and perform representstheprofitgeneratedbyitemsinX intransaction
multiple database scans. Furthermore, its performance de- T c .
teriorates when the number of time periods in a database
Definition 3. The time periods (shelf time) of an itemset
islargesinceTS-HOUNminespatternsineachtimeperiod
X ⊆I,isthesetoftimeperiodswhereX wassold,defined
separately and then perform a costly merge operations of
as pi(X)={pt(T )|T ∈D∧X ⊆T }.
results found in each time period. c c c
In this paper, we address these issues by presenting a Definition 4. The utility of an itemset X ⊆I in a time
novelalgorithmnamedFOSHU(FasterOn-ShelfHighUtil- periodh∈pi(X)isdenotedasu(X,h)anddefinedasu(X,h)
ityitemsetminer)tomineHUIswhileconsideringbothpos- = (cid:80) u(X,T ). Theutilityofanitemset X ⊆I
itive and negative item unit profit and the items’ on-shelf in a T d c a ∈ ta D b ∧ a h s ∈ e pt D (Tc is ) defined c as u(X)= (cid:80) u(X,h).
h∈pi(X)
time periods. FOSHU discovers itemsets in a single phase
without generating candidates, and mines all times periods Example 2. TheutilityofitemeinT isu(e,T )=3×2=
3 2
at the same time, thus avoiding the costly merge opera- 6. The utility of the itemset {c,e} in T is u({c,e},T ) =
2 2
tions of patterns found in each time period. Furthermore, u(c,T )+u(e,T ) = 1×6+3×2 = 12. The time periods
2 2
FOSHU introduces novel strategies to handle negative val- of itemset {c,e} are pi({c,e}) = {1,2,3}. The utility of
uesefficiently. WecomparetheperformanceofFOSHUand {c,e}inperiods1,2and3arerespectivelyu({c,e},1)=12,
TS-HOUN on several real-life datasets. Results show that u({c,e},2)=4andu({c,e},3)=11. Theutilityof{c,e}in
FOSHU can be more than 1000 times faster and uses up the database is u({c,e}) =12+4 +11 =27.
to 10 times less memory than TS-HOUN. Furthermore, ex-
Definition 5. The transaction utility (TU) of a transac-
periments show that FOSHU performs very well on dense
tion T is the sum of the utility of the items from T in
databases and databases with many time periods. c c
(cid:80)
T . i.e. TU(T ) = u(i,T ). Given an itemset X,
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section c c i∈Tc c
the total utility of the time periods of X is defined as
2, 3, 4 and 5 respectively presents the problem definition
(cid:80)
to(X)= TU(T ). Therelative util-
and related work, the FOSHU algorithm, the experimental h∈pi(X)∧Tc∈D∧h∈pt(Tc) c
ity of an itemset X ⊆ I in a database D is defined as
evaluation and the conclusion.
ru(X) = u(X)/to(X) and represents the percentage of the
profit that was generated by X during the time periods
2. PROBLEMDEFINITIONAND
where X was sold.
RELATEDWORK
Example 3. ThetransactionutilityoftransactionsT ,T ,
1 2
We first first introduce the problem definition. ... T arerespectivelyTU(T )=−2,TU(T )=7,TU(T )=
5 1 2 3
20, TU(T )=20 and TU(T )=11. The total utility of the
4 5
Definition 1. Let I be a set of items. Let D be a trans- time periods of {c,e} is to({c,e})=58. The relative utility
action database containing a set of transactions D = {T 1 , of {c,e} is ru({c,e} = u({c,e})/to({c,e}) =27/58 =0.46.
T , ...,T } such that for each transaction T , T ∈I and T
2 n c c c
has a unique identifier c called its Tid. Each item i ∈ I is Definition 6. AnitemsetX isahighon-shelfutilityitem-
associatedwithapositiveornegativenumberp(i),calledits set (HOU)ifitsrelativeutilityru(X)isnolessthanauser-
external utility, or unit profit. For each transaction T such specified minimum utility threshold minutil given by the
c
that i∈T , a positive number q(i,T ) is called the internal user (0 ≥ minutil ≥ 1). Otherwise, X is a low on-shelf
c c
utility of i, or its purchase quantity. Let PE be a set of utility itemset. The problem of high on-shelf utility itemset
positive integers representing time periods. Each transac- mining istodiscoverallHOUsinadatabasewhereexternal
tion T ∈ D is associated to a time period pt(T ) ∈ PE, utility values are positive [9]. The problem of high on-shelf
C c
representing the time period during which the transaction utility itemset mining with negative/positive unit profit [10]
occurred. is to discover all HOUs in a database where external utility
values may be positive or negative.
Example 1. Consider the transaction database shown in Example 4. If minutil = 0.43, 22 HOUs are found in
Table 1, which will be the running example. This database the database of the running example. They are {a,b,c,d,
contains five transactions (T 1 ,T 2 ...T 5 ) and three time peri- e, f}:0.44, {b,d,f}:0.47, {b,d,e,f}:0.53, {b,c,d,e,f}:0.55,
ods (1,2,3). Transaction T 2 occurred in time period 1, and {b, c,d,e}:0.49, {d,e,f}:0.44, {c,d,e,f}:0.47, {b, g}:0.54,
containsitemsa,c,eandg,whichrespectivelyappearinT 2 {b, e, f}:0.81, {b,c, e, g}:1.0, {b,c,g}:0.72, {e,g}:0.51, {c,e,
with an internal utility of 2, 6, 2 and 5. Table 2 indicates g}:0.77,{c,g}:0.48,{b,d}:0.67,{b,d,e}:0.8,{b,c,d,e}:0.89,
that the external utility of these items are respectively -5, {b, c,d}:0.75, {c,d,e}:0.43, {b,e}:0.45, {b, c, e}:0.55 and
1, 3 and 1. Thus, item a is sold at loss. {d,e}:0.53,wheretherelativeutilityofeachitemsetisindi-
cated after a colon.
Itcanbedemonstratedthatthe(relative)utilitymeasure itemsets are used to generate larger itemsets in each time
is not monotonic or anti-monotonic [9, 10, 12, 13, 15]. In period by applying a modified Two-Phase [13] HUI mining
other words, an itemset may have a utility lower, equal or algorithm, which explores itemsets in a level-wise manner
higher than the utility of its subsets. Therefore, the strate- similar to Apriori [2] but using pruning Property 2. Then,
gies that are used in FIM to prune the search space based theunionofthecandidates foundineachtimeperiodiscal-
on the anti-monotonicity of the support cannot be directly culated. Finally, in Phase 3, TS-HOUN scans the database
applied to discover HOUs. The state-of-the-art algorithm again to calculate the relative utility of each candidate and
for HOU mining is TS-HOUN [9, 10]. It circumvents the keep only HOUs. The TS-HOUN algorithm as described
previous problem by overestimating the utility of itemsets aboveiscompleteonlyifappliedonadatabasewhereitems
using a measure called the Transaction-Weighted Utiliza- have positive unit profit [10]. To address the problem of
tion(TWU)[3,13,15],whichisanti-monotonic. TheTWU mining HOUs with items having negative unit profits, the
measureassumesthatallitemshavepositiveexternalutility authors of TS-HOUN redefined the TWU as follows based
values. The TWU measure is defined as follows. on previous work from Chu et al [1].
Definition 7. For a given time period h, the transaction- Definition 9. The redefined transaction utility (RTU) of
weighted utilization (TWU) of an itemset X is denoted as a transaction T c is the sum of the utility of the items from
TWU(X,h)anddefinedasthesumofthetransactionutility T c having positive external utilities, that is RTU(T c ) =
(cid:80)
(cid:80) of transactions from h T c U o ( n T ta ) in . ing X, i.e. TWU(X,h) = uti x li ∈ z T a c t ∧ io p n (x) ( > R 0 T u W (x U ,T ) c o ). f a T n h i e tem red se e t fin X ed fo t r ra a ns t a im ct e io p n e - r w io e d igh h te i d s
Tc∈D∧X⊆Tc∧pt(Tc)=h c
definedasRTWU(X,h)=
(cid:80)
RTU(T ).
Example 5. Consider the database of the running exam-
Tc∈D∧X⊆Tc∧pt(Tc)=h c
Using RTWU instead of TWU has the effect of restoring
ple and that the external utility value of item a is 5 rather
Property 4 and this is what allows TS-HOUN to find the
than −5 (p(a)=5). The TU of transactions T , T , T , T
1 2 3 4
complete set of HOUs.
andT arerespectively3,17,25,20and11. TWU({b},2)=
5
Although, TS-HOUN is a pioneer algorithm for mining
TU(T )+TU(T )=25+20=45. TWU({b},3)=TU(T )=
3 4 5
HOUsinadatabasewithnegativeunitprofitsandtimepe-
11.
riods, it is inefficient for several reasons. First, it generate
The TWU measure has three important properties that candidates by mining each time period separately. There-
are used to prune the search space in TS-HOUN [10, 13]. fore,itmayhavetogeneratethesameitemsetseveraltimes
Thesepropertiesonlyholdifexternalutilityvaluesofitems in different periods before performing a costly union opera-
are positive [1]. tionofitemsetsinalltimeperiods. Anotherproblemisthat
TS-HOUN has to maintain a huge amount of candidates
Definition 8. The utility of a time period h is defined as in memory. Furthermore, TS-HOUN suffers from the well-
(cid:80)
pto(h)= Tc∈D∧h∈pt(Tc) TU(T c ). Therelativeutilityofan known problems of level-wise approach for itemset mining
itemsetX foratimeperiodhisru(X,h)=u(X,h)/pto(h). suchasgeneratingcandidatesnotappearinginthedatabase
[2].
Property 1. The TWU of an itemset X for a period h To address this issue, in this paper, we propose a novel
is an upper bound on the utility of X in period h, i.e. algorithmthatcanmineHOUsusingasinglephase,without
TWU(X,h)≥ u(X,h). maintaining candidates in memory, and that mine all time
periods at the same time rather than mining each time pe-
Property 2. For a period h, the TWU measure is anti- riodseparately. TheproposedalgorithmisinspiredbyFHM
monotonic. Let X and Y be two itemsets. If X ⊂Y, then [4], a recently proposed algorithm for high utility itemset
TWU(X,h)≥TWU(Y,h) mining, which is to our knowledge the fastest HUI mining
algorithm. FHM is designed to handle only positive exter-
Property 3. The TWU of an itemset X for a period h
nal utility values and does not consider time periods. FHM
divided by the total utility of the time period h is an up-
provides the benefit of mining HUIs in a single phase, thus
per bound on the relative utility of X in period h, i.e.
avoiding the candidate generation step of other HUI min-
TWU(X,h)/pto(h) ≥ ru(X,h).
ing algorithms such as Two-Phase [13], UPGrowth [15] and
IHUP [3]. FHM utilizes a depth-first search to explore the
Property 4. Let X be an itemset. If there exists no time
search space of itemsets. FHM associates a structure to
period h such that TWU(X,h)/pto(h) ≥ minutil, then X
eachpatternnamedutility-list,previouslyintroducedinthe
is not a high on-shelf utility itemset. Otherwise, X may or
HUI-Miner[12]algorithm. Utility-listsallowcalculatingthe
may not be a high on-shelf utility itemset.
utility of a pattern quickly by making join operations with
TS-HOUNisathreephrasealgorithm,whichworkssimi- utility-lists of smaller patterns. Utility-lists are defined as
larlytoothermultiple-phasealgorithmsforHUImining(e.g. follows.
Two-Phase [13], IHUP [3] and UPGrowth [15]). In Phase
Definition 10. Let (cid:31) be any total order on items from I.
1, TS-HOUN scans the database to calculate the trans-
The utility-list of an itemset X in a database D is a set of
action utility of each transaction, and group transactions
tuples such that there is a tuple (tid,iutil,rutil) for each
by time period. Then, for each time period h, it calcu-
transaction T containing X. The iutil element of a tuple
lates the TWU of all single item and pairs of items. For tid
istheutilityofX inT . i.e.,u(X,T ). Therutilelement
eachtimeperiod,TS-HOUNkeepeachitemsetX suchthat tid (cid:80) tid
of a tuple is defined as u(i,T ).
TWU(X)/pto(h)≥minutil. Theunionofitemsetsfoundin i∈Ttid∧i(cid:31)x,∀x∈X tid
all time periods is then calculated since only those itemsets Example 6. Assume that (cid:31) is the alphabetical order and
may be part of a HOU (by Property 4). In Phase 2, those that the external utility of item a is 5 rather than -5. The
utility-list of {a} is {(T ,5,3), (T ,10,17), (T ,5,25)}. The Property 8. Let X be an itemset and h be a time pe-
1 2 3
utility-list of {d} is {(T ,2,0), (T ,12,8), (T ,6,3)}. The riod. LetsumIUtil(X,h)andsumRUtil(X,h)respectively
1 3 4
utility-list of {a,d} is {(T ,11,0), (T ,17,8)}. denote the sum of iutil and rutil values in the utility list
1 3
ul(X) for the time period h. An upper bound on u(X) is
TodiscoverHUIs,FHMperformsasingledatabasescanto
sumIUtil(X,h)+sumRUtil(X,h),thatissumIUtil(X,h)+
createutility-listsofpatternscontainingsingleitems. Then,
sumRUtil(X,h)≥ u(X,h).
longer patterns are obtained by performing the join opera-
tion of utility-lists of shorter patterns. The join operation Property 9. Let X be an itemset and h be a time pe-
forsingleitemsisperformedasfollows. Considertwoitems riod. The inequation sumIUtil(X,h)+sumRUtil(X,h)≤
x,y such that x (cid:31) y, and their utility-lists ul({x}) and TWU(X,h)holds,thatissumIUtil(X,h)+sumRUtil(X,h)
ul({y}). The utility-list of {x,y} is obtained by creating is a tighter upper bound on u(X,h) than TWU(X,h).
a tuple (ex.tid,ex.iutil+ey.iutil,ey.rutil) for each pairs of
tuples ex ∈ ul({x}) and ey ∈ ul({y}) such that ex.tid = Property 10. Let X and Y be two itemsets. If X ⊂ Y,
ey.tid. The join operation for two itemsets P ∪{x} and thensumIUtil(X,h)+sumRUtil(X,h)≥sumIUtil(Y,h)+
P ∪{y}suchthatx(cid:31)y isperformedasfollows. Letul(P), sumRUtil(Y,h).
ul({x}) and ul({y}) be the utility-lists of P, {x} and {y}.
The utility-list of P ∪{x,y} is obtained by creating a tuple Property 11. For an itemset X and a period h, the value
(ex.tid,ex.iutil+ey.iutil−ep.iutil,ey.rutil)foreachsetof sumIUtil(X,h)+sumRUtil(X,h)dividedbythetotalutil-
tuples ex ∈ ul({x}), ey ∈ ul({y}), ep ∈ ul(P) such that ity of the time period pto(h) is an upper bound on the
ex.tid = ey.tid = ep.tid. Calculating the utility of an item- relative utility of X in period h, i.e. (sumIUtil(X,h)+
set using its utility-list, and calculating an upper-bound on sumRUtil(X,h))/pto(h) ≥ ru(X,h).
theutilityofitssupersetstoprunethesearchspaceisdone
based on the two following properties Property 12. LetX beanitemset. Ifthereexistsnotime
periodhsuchthatsumIUtil(X,h)+sumRUtil(X,h)/pto(h)
Property 5. Let be an itemset X. The utility u(X) is ≥ minutil, then X is not a high on-shelf utility itemset as
equal to the sum of iutil values in ul(X) [12]. well as any transitive extensions of X according to the to-
tal order (cid:31). Recall that an extension of X is an itemset
Property 6. Let be an itemset X. The sum of iutil and
obtained by appending an item y to X such that y (cid:31) i,
rutil values in ul(X) is an upper bound on u(X). More-
∀i∈X.
over, it can be shown that this upper bound is tighter than
TWU(X). [12].
Proof of the above properties are not given due to space
Property 7. LetX beanitemset. Lettheextensions ofX limitation. Besides, note that for implementation, utility-
be the itemsets that can be obtained by appending an item listsareredefinedsothatelementsinutilitylistsaregrouped
y to X such that y (cid:31) i, ∀i ∈ X. The utility of transitive by time period. This bring two benefits for efficiency. It al-
extensions of X can only be lower or equal to the the sum lowstocalculatesumIUtil(X,h)andsumRUtil(X,h)fora
of iutil and rutil values in ul(X). [12]. time period h and an itemset X by only scanning elements
representing transactions in h in ul(X). Second, it allows
Beforepresentingouralgorithm,wedemonstratewithan a faster construction of utility-lists by only comparing ele-
example that the property above used by FHM to prune ments of two utility lists if they belong to the same time
the search space is invalid if negative external utility values period.
appears in a database. Consider that items a and d in the
runningexamplehaverespectivelyexternalutilityvaluesof 3.2 Mainprocedure
5 and −2 The utility-list of {a,b} would thus contains a Themainprocedure(Algorithm1)takesasinputatrans-
single element, which is (T 3 ,9,−3). According to Property action database and the minutil threshold. The algorithm
7, because the sum of iutil and rutil values in ul({a,b}) firstscansthedatabasetocalculatetheglobalTWUofeach
is 6, none of its supersets can have a utility higher than 6. itemi,whichisdefinedasTWU(i)= (cid:80) TWU(X,h),
However,thisisnotthecasesinceitemsetu({a,b,f})=14. h∈pi(x)
and TWU({i},h) for each period h. Moreover, the set of
all time periods PE and the utility pto(h) of each period
3. THEFOSHUALGORITHM
h∈PE is computed during the first database scan.
Inthissection,wepresentourproposal,theFOSHUalgo- Then,thealgorithmattemptstoremovesingleitemsthat
rithm. Itreliesontheutility-liststructureusedintheFHM may not be part of a high on-shelf utility itemset. This is
[4] algorithm and the TWU measure, but it also introduces donebycomputingto({i})foreachitemibyusingpi(i)and
several novel ideas to handle time-periods and items with the utility of each period previously obtained. This allows
negative unit profit. to create the set I∗ containing all items i such that there
In the next subsections, we first address the problem of exists at least a period h such that TWU({i},h)/to({i})≥
generalizingpropertiesofutility-listsfortimeperiods. Then, minutil. Thereafter, all items not in I∗ will be ignored
wepresentthemainprocedureofthealgorithm. Theresult since they cannot be part of a high on-shelf utility itemset
is an algorithm for HOU mining. Finally, we explain how byProperty3. ItisimportanttonotethattheTWUneeds
thisalgorithmisextendedtoalsohandleitemswithnegative to be used here to prune single items instead of the sum
unit profits. of iutil and rutil value of utility-lists (Property 3), since
thislatterpruningstrategyisdefinedw.r.textensionsofan
3.1 Handlingtimeperiods
itemset,butatthisstageextensionsarenotconsideredyet.
Weadaptpropertiesofutilityliststodatabasescontaining The TWU values of items are then used to establish a
time periods as follows. total order (cid:31) on the set of items I∗, which is the order of
ascendingglobalTWUvalues. Thisorderisusedsinceitwas many other extensions of Px in the recursive call.
shown to reduce the search space when using a depth-first Since the Search procedure starts from single items, it
exploration in HUI mining [4, 12, 15]. recursivelyexplorethesearchspaceofitemsetsbyappending
A second database scan is then performed. During this single items, it can be easily seen based on Properties 3,
databasescan,itemsintransactionsarereorderedaccording 4, 5 and 12 that this procedure is correct and complete to
tothetotalorder(cid:31)andtheutility-listofeachitemi∈I∗ is discover all high utility on-shelf itemsets.
built. After the construction of utility-lists, the depth-first
searchexplorationofitemsetsstartsbycallingtherecursive
Algorithm 2: The Search procedure
procedureSearchwiththeemptyitemset∅,thesetofitems
input : P: an itemset, ExtensionsOfP: a set of
I∗ and minutil.
extensions of P, the minutil threshold
output: the set of high on-shelf utility itemsets
Algorithm 1: The FOSHU algorithm
input : D: a transaction database, minutil: a 1 foreach itemset Px∈ExtensionsOfP do
user-specified threshold 2 Scan Px.utilitylist to calculate sumIUtil(Px,h),
sumRUtil(Px,h) for each period h where Px
output: the set of high on-shelf utility itemsets
appears, to(X) and sumIUtil(Px);
1 Scan D to calculate TWU({i}), TWU({i},h) and 3 if sumIUtil(Px)/to(X)≥minutil then
pto(h) for each period h and each item i, as well as the 4 output Px;
set of all time periods PE; 5 end
2 Let I∗ ={i|∃h∈PE∧TWU({i},h) /pto(h) ≥ 6 if ∃h∈pi(Px) such that (sumIUtil(Px,h)+
minutil}; sumRUtil(Px,h))/to(Px)≥minutil then
3 Let (cid:31) be the global TWU ascending order on I∗; 7 ExtensionsOfPx←∅;
4 Scan D to build the utility-list of each item i∈I∗; 8 foreach itemset Py∈ExtensionsOfP such that
5 Search (∅, I∗, minutil); y(cid:31)x do
9 Pxy←Px∪Py;
10 Pxy.utilitylist← Construct (P,Px,Py);
The Search procedure (Algorithm 2) takes as input (1)
11 Scan Pxy.utilitylist to calculate
anitemsetP,(2)extensionsofP havingtheformPzmean-
TWU(Pxy,h) for each period h where Pxy
ing that Pz was previously obtained by appending an item
appears;
z to P, and (3) minutil. The search procedure operates as
12 if ∃h∈pi(Pxy) such that
follows. For each extension Px of P, the search procedure
TWU(Pxy,h)/pto(h)≥minutil then
firstscanstheutilitylistofPxtocalculatesumIUtil(Px,h)
13 ExtensionsOfPx←ExtensionsOfPx
for each period h where Px appears. At the same time,
∪Pxy;
thetotalutilityoftimeperiodswherePxappears(to(Px))
is calculated, as well as the total utility of Px (which is 14 end
equal to sumIUtil(Px) by Property 5). Then, the rela- 15 end
tive utility of Px is calculated as ru(Px) = sumIUtil(Px) 16 Search (Px, ExtensionsOfPx, minutil, pi(Px));
/to(Px). If ru(Px) is no less than minutil, Px is a high 17 end
on-shelf utility itemset and it is output. Then, if there ex- 18 end
istatimeperiodhsuchthatthesumofsumIUtil(Px,h)+
sumRUtil(Px,h))/to(Px)isnolessthanminutil,itmeans
that extensions of Px should be explored (by Property 12). 3.3 Handlingnegativeunitprofit
This is performed by merging Px with all extensions Py
Wenowdescribehowtheproposedalgorithmisextended
of P such that y (cid:31) x to form extensions of the form Pxy
to not just handle time periods but also items with nega-
containing|Px|+1items. Theutility-listofPxyisthencon-
tiveunitprofit. Lettheterm”positiveitems”and”negative
structedasinFHMbycallingtheConstructprocedure(cf.
items” denote items respectively having positive and neg-
Algorithm3)tojointheutility-listsofP,PxandPy. This
ative unit profit. To be able to transform the algorithm
latter procedure is the same as in FHM [4] and is thus not
described in the previous subsection into an algorithm that
describedinmoredetails. Then,acheckisperformedtode-
outputsallHOUswhenbothnegativeandpositiveitemsare
termineifPxy anditsextensionsmaybehighon-shelfutil-
used, we make the following modifications.
ityitemsetsbyusingtheTWU measure(line12),basedon
First,wedefinethetotalorder(cid:31)suchthatnegativeitems
Property 4. This is done by scanning the utility list of Pxy
always succeed all positive items. By using this order, pos-
tocalculateTWU(Pxy,h)foreachtimeperiodhwherePxy
itive items are always use to extend an itemset first before
appears. IfTWU(Pxy,h)/pto(h)≥minutilforatleastone
usingnegativeitems. Thisletusdefinenewpruningproper-
periodh,thenPxy willbeaddedtoExtensionsOfPx,the
ties. In the following, for an itemset X we use the notation
set of extensions of Px which will be considered for further
up(X)andun(X)torespectivelyrefertothesetofallpos-
extensions with a recursive call to the Search procedure.
itive items in X and the set of all negative items in X.
Note that the check at line 12 may seem redundant since
the TWU is a less tight upper bound than the sum of iutil
Property 13. LetX beanitemset. Itfollowsthatu(X,h)
and rutil values used in the check at line 6 (that would be
≤ u(up(X),h).
performed in a recursive call to Search with Pxy). How-
ever,thereisagoodreasonforperformingthecheckatline Proof. ThispropertyholdsbecauseX\up(X)=un(X)
12. It is that pruning an itemset Pxy before the recursive and negative items can only decrease the utility of X.
call to Search will avoid comparing Pxy with potentially
Algorithm 3: The Construct procedure inthelastparagraphofSection2. Basedontheabovemod-
ifications and definitions, we can rewrite pruning Property
input : P: an itemset, Px: the extension of P with an
12 as follows.
item x, Py: the extension of P with an item y
output: the utility-list of Pxy
Property 17. LetX beanitemset. Ifthereexistsnotime
1 UtilityListOfPxy←∅; period h such that sumIPUtil(X,h) + sumRUtil(X,h) /
2 foreach tuple ex∈Px.utilitylist do pto(h)≥minutil,thenX isnotahighon-shelfutilityitem-
3 if ∃ey∈Py.utilitylist and ex.tid=exy.tid then set as well as any transitive extensions of X.
4 if P.utilitylist(cid:54)=∅ then Proof. Ifweonlyconsidertransitiveextensionswithpos-
5 Search element e∈P.utilitylist such that itiveitems,thepropertybecomesequivalenttoProperty12.
e.tid=ex.tid.;
Now, for extensions with negative items succeeding exten-
6 exy← sions with positive items according to (cid:31), the property is
(ex.tid,ex.iutil+ey.iutil−e.iutil,ey.rutil);
alsotruesincewhennegativesitemsareusedforextensions
7 end this property becomes Property 16. This is true because
8 else sumRUtil(X,h) will be equal to 0 and sumIPUtil(X,h)
9 exy←(ex.tid,ex.iutil+ey.iutil,ey.rutil); will be equal to u(up(X),h).
10 end
11 UtilityListOfPxy← Basedontheaboveideas,themodifiedFOSHUalgorithm
UtilityListOfPxy∪{exy}; isobtainedbymakingthefollowingmodifications. First,in-
12 end stead of calculating the original TWU, the redefined TWU
13 end is used to avoid underestimating the utility of HOUs con-
14 return UtilityListPxy; tainingpositiveitems,sinceitwasshowninTS-HOUN[10]
that using the redefined TWU will not prune HOUs. Sec-
ond, utility-lists are redefined such that iputil and inutil
elements are used. Furthermore, only utility values of pos-
Property 14. Let X be an itemset and z be a negative
itive items are included in rutil values of utility-lists (as
item such that z (cid:54)∈ X. It follows that u(up(X∪{z}),h) ≤
previously explained). Third, the (cid:31) total order is defined
u(up(X),h).
such that all negative items succeed positive items (as pre-
Proof. Becausez isanegativeitem,up(X,h)=up(X∪ viously explained). Fourth, the pruning condition based on
{z},h). Moreover, the number of transactions containing Property12forpositiveitemsbasedonthesumofiutiland
X∪{z}inhcanonlybesmallerthanthenumberoftransac- rutil values is redefined as Property 17.
tionscontainingX. Thus,u(up(X∪{z}),h)≤u(up(X),h).
But note that u(X,h) may be smaller, greater or equal to 4. EXPERIMENTALSTUDY
u(X∪{z},h).
We performed several experiments to assess the perfor-
mance of the proposed algorithm. Experiments were per-
Property 15. LetX beanitemset. ForanyitemsetY re-
formed on a computer with a third generation 64 bit Core
sultingfromtransitiveextensionsofX withnegativeitems,
i5 processor running Windows 7 and 5 GB of free RAM.
u(up(Y),h)≤u(up(X),h).
WecomparedtheperformanceofFOSHUwiththestate-of-
Proof. Thisdirectlyfollowsfrompreviousproperty. the-art algorithm TS-HOUN for high on-shelf utility item-
set mining with negative unit profits. All memory mea-
Basedonthisobservation,wecanusethefollowingprop- surementsweredoneusingtheJavaAPI.Experimentswere
erty to prune transitive extensions of an itemset with nega- carried on five real-life datasets having varied characteris-
tive items. tics. The characteristics of datasets are shown in table 4,
where the |D|, |I| and avgL columns respectively indicate
Property 16. LetX beanitemset. Ifonlynegativeitems the number of transactions, the number of distinct items
may be appended to X according to (cid:31) and there exists no and average transaction length.
time period h such that u(up(X),h) / pto(h) ≥ minutil,
then X is not a high on-shelf utility itemset as well as any dataset |D| |I| avgL
transitive extension Y of X. mushroom 8,124 120 23
retail 88,162 16,470 10.3
But integrating this pruning condition in the algorithm accidents 340,183 468 33.8
requires to be able to calculate u(up(X),h) efficiently. To chess 3,196 75 35
achieve this, we separate iutil values in utility-lists into pumsb 49,046 7,116 74
two values: iputil and inutil. For a given transaction T ,
c
iputil and inutil respectively indicates u(up(X),T ) and
c
u(un(X),T c ). Having these values, u(up(X),h) can be eas- Table 3: Dataset characteristics
ilycomputedandalsou(X,h)byrespectivelysummingthe
iputilvalues(denotedassumIPUtil(X,h))ofperiodh,and For all datasets, external utilities for items are generated
summing both the iputil and inutil values of period h. between-1,000and1,000byusingalog-normaldistribution
Besides, we also redefine rutil values so that only utility and quantities of items are generated randomly between 1
values of positive items are considered. The reason is that and5,similarlytothesettingsof[3,4,12,15]. Moreover,the
thealgorithmcanmisssomeHOUsifrutilvaluesofnegative numberoftimeperiodswassetsetto5asin[10]. Thesource
items are included in utility lists as we have demonstrated code of all algorithms and datasets can be downloaded as
part of the SPMF open-source data mining library http: memorybeforelow-utiltyitemsetscanbepruned. Thethird
//www.philippe-fournier-viger.com/spmf/ [8]. reasonisthatnegativeitemsarehandledmoreefficientlyin
FOSHU than in TS-HOUN. FOSHU introduces the use of
4.1 Influenceofminutil threshold
atotalorder(cid:31)suchthatnegativeitemsareusedtoextend
We ran the FOSHU and TS-HOUN algorithms on each itemsets after all positive items have been considered. By
dataset while decreasing the minutil threshold until algo- replacing the use of iutil values by iputil and inutil values,
rithms became too long to execute, ran out of memory or weobtainedapruningconditionbasedonsumIPUtil(X,h)
a clear winner was observed. For each dataset, we recorded + sumRUtil(X,h). This condition is more tight than the
the execution time and the maximum memory usage. redefined TWU and is simplified as sumIPUtil(X,h) for
The comparison of execution times is shown in Fig. 1 for extensionswithnegativeitems(sincenegativeitemsarenot
thedatasetsusingalogarithmicscale. Formushroom,retail, considered in rutil values). Lastly, an interesting observa-
chess,pumsb andaccidents,FOSHUclearlyoutperformTS- tion is that FOSHU performs very well on sparse datasets
HOUN.Itisrespectivelyupto1000timesfaster,683times (e.g. retail), as well as dense datasets (e.g. mushroom and
faster,2000timesfaster,89times,and178timesfasterthan chess).
TS-HOUN.
4.2 Influenceofthenumberoftimeperiods
1000000 mushroom retail We also performed an experiment to assess the influence
TS-HOUN 1000 TS-HOUN of the number of time periods on the execution time. We
)sm ( em itnuR 1 1 0
1
0 00
0
00 0
00
0 0 FOSHU )s( em itnuR 1
1
0
0
0 FOSHU r d
R
a o
e
n m
su
F l
l
y
t
O
s
g S r
a
H o
r
u
e
U p
s
e a
h
d n
o
d
w
tr
n
T an S
i
s
n
- a H c
F
O t
i
i
g
o U
.
n N s
2
i o n
f
n
o
to
r
th 5
th
e ,
e
2 s 5 a
r
m
e
a
t
n e
a
d
i
d
l
5 a
d
0 t
a
a
t
t s
a
i e m
s
t
e
s e
t
b
.
p u e
A
t ri
s
r o a d
w
n s
e
- .
100 1 can see, FOSHU has a much better scalability w.r.t to the
0.25 0.3 minutil 0.35 0.4 0.01 0.01 m 2 inutil 0.014 number of periods. FOSHU is only 1.26 times slower when
accidents chess thedatasethas50timeperiodsthanwhenthedatasethas5
10000 10 000 000
TS-HOUN TS-HOUN time periods, while TS-HOUN is 327 times slower. Results
)s(
em itnuR
1
1
0
0
00
0
FOSHU )sm
( em itnuR
1 0
1 1
0
0
0
0 0
0
0 00
0
0 0
0
0
FOSHU f
t F
o
i O o
r
n S
t
. H
h
B
e
U u
o
t p
th
e t r h
e
f
r
e or s
d
m a
a
m s
ta
e b
se
e t
t
t r
s
t e e n
a
r d
r
i
e
s ca t
n
n h
o
a
t
b t e
s
i
h
t o
o
b m
w
s i e
n
n r e v
d
s e
u
d a
e
. ll
t
T t
o
i h m e
sp
e r
a
e p
c
a e
e
s r o i
l
o n
im
d w s
it
h a
a
y t
-
1 000
thesametime,whileTS-HOUNminesthemseparatelyand
10 100
0.28 0.33 0.38 0.62 0.63 0.64 0.65 0.66 mergeresultsfoundineach-timeperiods,whichdegradesits
minutil minutil performance when the number of time periods is large.
pumsb
1000 TS-HOUN
FOSHU retail
)s(
em
100 10000
TS-HOUN-5
itnuR
10
1000
F
T
O
S-
S
H
H
O
U
U
-5
N-25
FOSHU-25
1
0.45 0.6 minutil 0.75 0.9
)s(
em 100
T
FO
S-
S
H
H
O
U
U
-5
N
0
-50
itn
u
Figure 1: Execution time w.r.t minutil R
10
In terms of memory usage, FOSHU has a lower memory
1
consumptiononalldatasets. Forthemushroom,retail,acci-
0.01 0.012 0.014 0.016 0.018 0.02
dents,chessandpumsb,thememoryusageofTS-HOUNand minutil
FOSHUforthelowestminutilvaluesarerespectively69/39,
Figure 2: Execution time w.r.t time period count
571/539, 139/14, 602/498 and 123/98. Overall, FOSHU
used up about 10 times less memory than TS-HOUN on
some datasets. 4.3 Influenceofthenumberoftransactions
There are several reasons why FOSHU has the best over-
We also performed an experiment to asses the scalabil-
allperformance. ThefirstreasonisthatFOSHUutilizesthe
ity of FOSHU w.r.t the number of transactions. For this
sum of iutil and rutil values as well as the TWU to prune
experiment, we ran FOSHU on all datasets with the low-
the search space, while TS-HOUN only relies on the TWU.
est minutil value used in previous experiments, and varied
Since the sum of iutil and rutil values is a stricter upper
the number of transactions from 25% to 100%. Results are
boundthantheTWU,thisallowsFOSHUtofurtherprune
showninTable4.3. WecanobservethatFOSHUhaslinear
thesearchspace. ThesecondreasonisthatFOSHUutilizes
scalability w.r.t to the number of transactions. Scalability
a very efficient depth-first search that mines high on-shelf
of TS-HOUN is also linear and is not shown due to space
itemsets without generating candidates, and mines all time
limitation.
periodsatthesametime. Ontheotherhand, TS-HOUNis
alevel-wisealgorithmthatneedstomaintainalargeamount
5. CONCLUSION
of itemsets in memory to find larger patterns, and mine
patterns in each time periods separately before merging re- Inthispaper,wehavepresentedanovelalgorithmnamed
sultsofalltimeperiods. Furthermore,sinceTS-HOUNuses FOSHU(FastOn-ShelfHighUtilityitemsetminer)formin-
a multiple phase approach, it suffers from the problem of ing high utility itemsets in databases where negative exter-
generatingandmaintainingahugeamountofcandidatesin nal utility values appear and shelf time of items are con-
dataset 25% 50% 75% 100% [6] P. Fournier-Viger, C.W. Wu and V.S. Tseng. Novel
mushroom 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 Concise Representations of High Utility Itemsets using
retail 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 Generator Patterns. In Proc. 10th International
accidents 9.3 9.5 9.8 10.2 Conference on Advanced Data Mining and Applications,
chess 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 Springer, 2014.
pumsb 4.1 4.1 4.2 4.2 [7] P. Fournier-Viger. FHN: Efficient Mining of
High-Utility Itemsets with Negative Unit Profits. In
Proc. 10th International Conference on Advanced Data
Table 4: Scalability of FOSHU w.r.t database size Mining and Applications, Springer, 2014.
[8] P. Fournier-Viger, A. Gomariz, A. Soltani, T.
Gueniche, C.W. Wu., V.S. Tseng. SPMF: a Java
sidered. FOSHUbringsseveralimprovementsoverprevious Open-Source Pattern Mining Library. In Journal of
algorithms. By using utility-lists, it is a single phase algo- Machine Learning Research. 15:,2014.
rithmthatdoesnotneedtomaintaincandidatesinmemory.
[9] G.-C. Lan, T.-P. Hong and V.S. Tseng. Discovery of
Italsoreliesonadepth-firstsearchratherthanalevel-wise
high utility itemsets from on-shelf time periods of
search. Moreover, FOSHU mines HOUs in all time periods
products. In Expert Systems with Applications.
atthesametimeratherthanminingeachperiodseparately
38:5851–5857, 2011.
andperformingcostlypost-processingoftheresultsofeach
[10] G.-C. Lan, T.-P. Hong, J.-P. Huang and V.S. Tseng.
timeperiod. FOSHUalsointroducesthenovelideaofusing
On-shelf utility mining with negative item values. In
a total order where negative items are last to handle items
Expert Systems with Applications. 41:3450–3459, 2014.
with negative external utility values more efficiently.
[11] C.-Y. Li, J.-S. Yeh, C.-C. Chang. Isolated items
Anextensiveexperimentalstudywithfivereal-lifedatasets
discarding strategy for discovering high utility itemsets.
showsthatFOSHUcanbemorethanthreeordersofmagni-
In Data & Knowledge Engineering, 64(1): 198–217,
tudefasterandcanuseupto10timeslessmemorythanthe
2008.
state-of-the-artalgorithmTS-HOUN,andwasshowntoper-
[12] M. Liu and J. Qu. Mining High Utility Itemsets
formverywellondensedatasets. Furthermore,experiments
without Candidate Generation. In Proc. 21st ACM
show that FOSHU performs very well on dense databases
Intern. Conf. Inform. Known. Management, pp. 55–64,
and databases with many time periods. The source code of
2012.
all algorithms and datasets used in our experiments can be
downloaded as part of the open-source SPMF data mining [13] Y. Liu, W. Liao and A. Choudhary. A two-phase
library http://www.philippe-fournier-viger.com/spmf/ algorithm for fast discovery of high utility itemsets. In
[8]. Forfuturework,weareinterestedinexploringotherin- Proc. 9th Pacific-Asia Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
teresting problems involving utility in itemset mining such Mining, pp. 689–695, 2005.
as sequential pattern mining [5]. [14] B.-E. Shie, J.-H. Cheng, K.-T. Chuang and V.S.
Tseng. A One-Phase Method for Mining High Utility
Mobile Sequential Patterns in Mobile Commerce
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Environments. In Proc. 25th Intern. Conf. Indust., Eng
ThisworkisfinancedbyaNationalScienceandEngineer- and Other Applications of Applied Intelligent Systems,
ing Research Council (NSERC) of Canada research grant. pp. 616–626, 2012.
[15] V.S. Tseng, B.-E. Shie, C.-W. Wu and P.S. Yu.
Efficient Algorithms for Mining High Utility Itemsets
7. REFERENCES
from Transactional Databases. In IEEE Trans. Knowl.
[1] J.-C. Chu, V.S. Tseng and T. Liang. An efficient Data Eng, 25(8):1772–1786, 2013.
algorithm for mining high utility itemsets with negative [16] J. Yin, Z. Zheng, L. Cao. USpan: An Efficient
item values in large databases, Applied Math. Comput., Algorithm for Mining High Utility Sequential Patterns.
215:767-778, 2009. In Proc. 8th ACM SIGKDD Intern. Conf. Knowl.
[2] R. Agrawal and R. Srikant. Fast algorithms for mining Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 660–668, 2012.
association rules in large databases. In Proc. Int. Conf.
Very Large Databases, pp. 487–499, 1994.
[3] C.F. Ahmed, S.K. Tanbeer, B.-S. Jeong and Y.-K. Lee.
Efficient Tree Structures for High-utility Pattern
Mining in Incremental Databases. In IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng, 21(12):1708–1721, 2009.
[4] P. Fournier-Viger, C.-W. Wu, S. Zida and V.S. Tseng.
Faster High-Utility Itemset Mining using Estimated
Utility Co-occurrence Pruning. In Proc. 21st Intern.
Symp. Methodologies Intell. Systems, Springer,
pp. 83–92, 2014.
[5] P. Fournier-Viger, A. Gomariz, M. Campos and R.
Thomas. Fast Vertical Sequential Pattern Mining Using
Co-occurrence Information. In Proc. 18th Pacific-Asia
Conference Knowl. Discovery and Data Mining,
Springer, LNAI, pp. 40–52, 2014.
