Incrementally Updating High-Utility Itemsets
with Transaction Insertion
Jerry Chun-Wei Lin1,2 , Wensheng Gan1, Tzung-Pei Hong3,4, and Jeng-Shyang Pan1,2
1 Innovative Information Industry Research Center (IIIRC)
2 Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Internet Information Collaboration
School of Computer Science and Technology
Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen Graduate School
HIT Campus Shenzhen University Town, Xili, Shenzhen, P.R. China
3 Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
National University of Kaohsiung, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, R.O.C.
4 Department of Computer Science and Engineering
National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, R.O.C.
jerrylin@ieee.org, {wsgan001,jengshyangpan}@gmail.com,
tphong@nuk.edu.tw
Abstract. High-utility itemsets mining (HUIM) is designed to solve the
limitations of association-rule mining by considering both the quantity and
profit measures. Most algorithms of HUIM are designed to handle the static
database. Fewer research handles the dynamic HUIM with transaction insertion,
thus requiring the computations of database rescan and combination explosion
of pattern-growth mechanism. In this paper, an efficient incremental algorithm
with transaction insertion is designed to reduce computations without candidate
generation based on the utility-list structures. The enumeration tree and the
relationships between 2-itemsets are also adopted in the proposed algorithm to
speed up computations. Several experiments are conducted to show the
performance of the proposed algorithm in terms of runtime, and memory
consumption.
Keywords: utility mining, transaction insertion, utility-list, enumeration tree,
dynamic databases.
1 Introduction
Association-rule mining (ARM) [2, 3, 4, 8] is a fundamental task for revealing the
relationships among items. Many algorithms have been respectively proposed to
efficiently mine the association rules based on whether the level-wise or pattern-
growth mechanism [3, 8]. Both the level-wise or pattern-growth approaches can only
handle the static database in batch mode. When transactions are changed in the
database, new information may arise and old ones may become invalid. The updated
database is required to be processed to mine the updated information in batch mode,
which is not suitable in practical applications. To solve the limitations of mining
algorithms in batch mode [11, 17], Cheung et al. proposed the Fast-UPdated (FUP)
X. Luo, J.X. Yu, and Z. Li (Eds.): ADMA 2014, LNAI 8933, pp. 44–56, 2014.
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014
Incrementally Updating High-Utility Itemsets with Transaction Insertion 45
algorithm [9] to maintain and update the discovered information with transaction
insertion. When the itemsets are small in the original database (support ratio is lower
than minimum support threshold) but large (support ratio is larger than or equal to the
minimum support threshold) in the inserted database, the original database is still
required to be rescanned to find the actual occurrence frequencies of the small
itemsets in the original database.
For ARM, the implicit factors such as profit or quantity are not considered. High-
utility itemsets mining (HUIM) [7, 20] was thus proposed to partially solve the
limitations of ARM. It may be thought of as an extension of frequent-itemset mining
by considering the sold quantities and profits of the items. Several algorithms have
been proposed to mine HUIs in a static database [12, 16, 18, 19]. Some HUIM
algorithms have been proposed with transaction insertion [6, 13, 14]. The original
database is still, however, required to be rescanned for maintaining and updating the
HUIs in some cases. The problem of combination explosion based on level-wise
approach is also a critical issue to be solved.
In this paper, a memory-based incremental approach is proposed with transaction
insertion to efficiently discover HUIs. The proposed algorithm inherits the HUI-Miner
algorithm [15] to build the utility-list structures for mining HUIs with transaction
insertion. An Estimated Utility Co-Occurrence Structure (EUCS) [10] is also applied
in the proposed algorithm to speed up the performance of the proposed approach.
Based on the designed algorithm, it outperforms the two-phase algorithm [16] and the
state-of-the-art FHM algorithm [10] in batch mode and other previous algorithms for
incremental mining [13, 14].
2 Related Work
Utility mining [7, 20] is concerned as an extension of the frequent itemsets by
considering both the quantities and profits of items to discover the valuable itemsets
than the frequent ones. An itemset is concerned as a HUI if its utility is larger than or
equal to the minimum utility count. Chan et al. first proposed the top-k objective-
directed data mining to mine the top-k closed utility patterns based on business
objective [7]. Yao et al. proposed the utility model to firstly consider both quantities
and profits of the items to mine the HUIs [20]. Liu et al. proposed the two-phase
model [16] to mine HUIs based on the developed transaction-weighted downward
closure (TWDC) property. Many algorithms been proposed to mine HUIs based on
two-phase model. Lin et al. designed a high utility pattern tree (HUP-tree) algorithm
[12] to compress the original database into a tree structure. Tseng et al. then proposed
the UP-tree structure with UP-growth and UP-growth+ mining algorithms to
efficiently mine HUIs [18]. Liu et al. then proposed a HUI-Miner algorithm [15] to
compress the database into the utility-list structures. Each entry in the utility-list
structure stores transaction IDs (TIDs), the utility of itemset X in the transaction
(Iutility), and the rest utilities of itemsets except X in the transaction (Rutility). Based
on the HUI-Miner algorithm and the designed pruning strategy of the enumeration
tree, the HUIs can be easily discovered. Fournier-Viger et al. then modified the
46 J.C.-W. Lin et al.
HUI-Miner algorithm and designed an Estimated Utility Co-Occurrence Structure
(EUCS) to keep the relationships between 2-itemsets, thus speeding up the
computations compared to the HUI-Miner algorithm [10].
Most algorithms process the static database to mine HUIs. Ahmed et al. proposed
an IHUP algorithm with three tree structures for mining HUIs with transaction
insertion [6]. Lin et al. proposed an incremental algorithm (FUP-HUI-INS) [13] for
updating the discovered HUIs based on the FUP concept [9] and two-phase model
[16] with transaction insertion. Lin et al. then also proposed an improved pre-large
concept for mining high-utility itemsets with transaction insertion (PRE-HUI-INS)
[14]. Since FUP-HUI-INS and PRE-HUI-INS algorithms are processed by two-phase
model, an additional database rescan is still necessary performed to find the actually
HUIs. Besides, both of them required computations to find the HTWUIs based on the
pattern-growth approach.
3 Preliminaries and Problem Statement
Definition 1. An itemset X is a set of k distinct items {i , i , …, i} in a quantitative
1 2 k
database D = {T , T , …, T }, in which k is the length of an itemset. An itemset X is
1 2 n
contained in a transaction T if X ⊆ T .
n n
Definition 2. The utility of an item i in T is defined as u(i, T ) = q(i, T ) × p(i), in
j q j q j q j
which q(i, T ) is the quantity of an item i in T , p(i) is the profit value of an item i.
j q j q j j
Definition 3. The utility of an itemset X in transaction T is denoted as u(X, T ), which
q q
can be defined as:
u(X,T )=∑ u(i ,T ).
q i∈X∧X⊆T j q
j q
Definition 4. The utility of an itemset X in D is denoted as u(X), which can be defined
as:
u(X)=∑ u(X,T ).
X⊆T ∧T ∈D q
q q
Definition 5. The transaction utility of transaction T is denoted as tu(T ), in which m
q q
is the number of items in T . Thus tu(T ) can be defined as:
q q
m
tu(T )=∑u(i ,T ).
q j q
j=1
Definition 6. Total utility of D is denoted as TUD, which can be defined as:
TUD =∑ tu(T ).
T ∈D q
q
Definition 7. Given a database D and the minimum high utility threshold is set as ¶, a
high-utility itemset X in D is denoted as HUID(X), which can be defined as:
HUID(X)=∑ u(X,T )≥ε×TUD.
X⊆T ∧T ∈D q
q q
Incrementally Updating High-Utility Itemsets with Transaction Insertion 47
Problem Statement. Given a transactional database D, its total utility is defined as
TUD from D, a minimum utility threshold is set at 0 <ε ≤ 1, the HUIM is to find the
completely k-itemsets whose utilities larger than or equal to minimum utility count as
)
(ε ×TUD .
Since the downward-closure property of ARM is not kept in HUIM, the
transaction-weighted downward closure property (TWDC) was thus proposed by two-
phase model [16].
Definition 8. The transaction-weighted utility of an itemset X is the sum of all
transaction utilities tu(T ) containing an itemset X, which is defined as:
q
TWU(X)=∑ tu(T ).
X⊆T q∧T
q
∈D q
Definition 9. An itemset X is defined as a high transaction-weighted utilization
itemset (HTWUI) if TWUD(X) ≥ ε × TUD.
Property 1. The transaction-weighted downward closure (TWDC) property of two-
phase model is that if an itemset X is not as a HTWUI, the subsets of X could not be
HUIs.
4 Proposed Incremental Algorithm
In this paper, the HUI-Miner algorithm [15] is adopted to design the incremental
algorithm for HUIM. Before transactions are inserted into the original database, the
utility-list structures are built in advance to keep not only the HTWUIs but also those
itemsets which are not the high transaction-weighted utilization itemsets from the
original database to avoid the database rescan with transaction insertion.
4.1 Utility-List Structures
Definition 10. An entry of X in the utility-list structure consisted of the set TIDs for X
in T (X ⊆ T ∈ D), the set of utility for X in T (Iutility), and the set of remaining
q q q
utility for X in T (Rutility), in which Rutility is defined as:
q
X.Rutility(T )=∑ u(i ,T ).
q i ∈T ∧i ∉X j q
j q j
The construction algorithm can be found from HUI-Miner approach [15]. In the
construction process, the itemsets are sorted in ascending order of their transaction-
weighted utility (TWU). For the Rutility of an itemset X in a transaction, it keeps the
rest utilities in the transaction except the processed itemset X. Since the TWU values
of the itemsets are changed with transaction insertion, the sorted order of the utility-
list structures and the Rutility value should also be changed. The number of inserted
transactions is, however, very small compared to the original database. In the
proposed algorithm, the sorted order of the itemsets in the inserted transactions
follows the initially order of itemsets in the original database.
48 J.C.-W. Lin et al.
Definition 11. The X.Iutility.sum is to sum the utilities of an itemset X in database D
as:
X.Iutility.sum=∑ X.Iutility(T ).
X⊆T ∧T ∈D q
q q
Definition 12. The X.Rutility.sum is to sum the rest utilities except an itemset X in
database D as:
X.Rutility.sum=∑ X.Rutility(T ).
X⊆T ∧T ∈D q
q q
For more k-itemsets, the utility-list structures are recursively constructed until no
candidates are generated for determination.
Definition 13. Any extension of an itemset X is a combination of X with the
itemset(s) after an itemset X, which is denoted as X’.
For example, assume the itemset B, then the extension of B is BC, BD and so on,
both BC and BD can denoted as B’.
Based on the HUI-Miner [15], a pruning strategy can also be adopted to compress
the border for determination than the TWDC property.
Property 2. Given the utility-list structure of an itemset X, if the summation of Iutility
and Rutility of an itemset X in D is less than the minimum utility count, any extension
X’ of X is not a HUI.
In addition, the Estimated Utility Co-occurrence Pruning (EUCP) strategy [10] is
also adopted in the proposed algorithm to further keep the relationship of 2-itemsets,
thus eliminating the extension itemsets with lower utility without re-constructing the
utility-list structures.
4.2 Proposed Algorithm
Based on the above properties inheriting from HUI-Miner and EUCS structures, the
proposed incremental algorithm is described in Fig. 1.
Algorithm 1: HUI-list-INS algorithm
INPUT: D, the original database; d, the incremental database; TUD, the total utility
in D; TUd, the total utility in d; ptable, the profit table; ε, the minimum
utility threshold; EUCS, the Estimated Utility Co-Occurrence Structure;
DB.UL, the utility list of D; db.UL, the utility list of d; U.UL, the utility
list of U; X.UL, the utility list of itemset X.
OUTPUT: High-utility itemsets.
BEGIN Procedure
1. DB.UL=NULL, db.UL=NULL, U.UL=NULL, X.UL=NULL;
2. FOR each T in D DO
q
3. FOR each X in T DO
q
4. X.UL  {T , Iutility, Rutility}.
q
5. EUCS  {X, X’}. //X’, the extension of X.
6. END FOR
7. END FOR
∪
8. DB.UL X.UL.
Fig. 1. Pseudo code of the proposed HUI-list-INS algorithm
Incrementally Updating High-Utility Itemsets with Transaction Insertion 49
9. FOR each T in d DO
q
10. FOR each X in T DO
q
11. X.UL  {T , Iutility, Rutility}.
q
12. update the TWU(X) in EUCS.
13. END FOR
14. END FOR
∪
15. db.UL X.UL.
,
16. call merge-list(DB.UL db.UL, U.UL).
17. FOR each X in U.UL DO
18. IF X.Iutility.sum ≥ (TUD+TUd) × ε
19. HUIsX.
20. END IF
21. IF X.Iutility.sum + X.Rutility.sum ≥ (TUD+TUd)× ε THEN
22. extULs  null. // extULs, the set of utility list of all X’s 1-extensions;
23. FOR each Y after X in U.UL DO
24. IF ∃(X,Y,Z)∈EUCS and Z ≥ (TUD+TUd)× ε THEN
25. extULs  extULs + Construct(X.UL, Y, Z).
26. END IF
27. END FOR
28. call HUI-list-INS(X, extULs, ε).
29. END IF
30. END FOR
END Procedure
Fig. 1. (continued)
For the designed incremental algorithm with transaction insertion, the original
database is firstly scanned to construct the utility-list structures for all 1-itemsets and
the EUCS structure for each item (Line 2-8). Similarly, the inserted transactions are
processed in the same way. Each related TWU values of items in the built EUCS are
also updated by the inserted transactions (Line 9-15). The designed merge-list
algorithm is used to combine the utility-list structures from the original database and
inserted transactions into the updated utility-list structures (Line 16). After that, the 1-
extensions of an itemset X is recursively processed (Line 17-28) by using a depth-first
procedure. Each itemset X is then determined by the designed condition to check
whether it is a HUI (Line 18-20). The extensions of the processed itemset are then
determined by the designed condition (Line 21) for depth-first search. The updated
EUCS structure is also used to prune the unpromising itemset, thus reducing the
search space for mining high-utility itemsets (Line 24-26). The construction of utility-
list structure algorithm is then performed to construct the extULs of X. The proposed
HUI-list-INS algorithm is then recursively performed to mine HUIs (Line 21-29). The
algorithm is then terminated until no itemsets are generated. The construction
procedure of utility-list structures are recursively processed for k-itemsets if it is
necessary to process the depth-first search in the search space. The construction
algorithm is similar as the algorithm shown in [15]. The proposed merge-list
algorithm to combine original database and the incremental one is described in Fig. 2.
50 J.C.-W. Lin et al.
Algorithm 2: merge-list algorithm
INPUT: DB.UL is the utility-list of D; db.UL is the utility-list of d; U.UL is the
utility-list of U.
OUTPUT: U.UL.
BEGIN Procedure
1. U.UL = null, X.UL = null.
2. FOR each itemset X and X.UL∈DB.UL DO
3. IF X.UL ≠ null THEN
4. search itemset X∈DB.UL in db.UL
5. IF ∃( X∈DB.UL and X∈db.UL) THEN
/* E is the element of X.UL */
i
6. FOR each element E∈X.UL and X.UL∈db.UL DO
i
7. X.Iutility.sum  X.Iutility.sum + E.Iutility;
i
8. X.Rutility.sum  X.Rutility.sum + E.Rutility;
i
9. X.UL E.
i
10. END FOR
11. END IF
12. U.UL  X.UL.
13. END IF
14. END FOR
15. RETURN U.UL.
END Procedure
Fig. 2. Pseudo code of the proposed merge-list algorithm
5 Experimental Evaluation
Several experiments in terms of execution time, and memory consumption are
conducted to show the performance of the proposed algorithm in four database
including three real-life [1] and a synthetic databases [5]. The two-phase algorithm
[16], the state-of-the-art FHM algorithm [10], two incremental FUP-HUI-INS [13]
and PRE-HUI-INS [14] algorithms are used to compare the proposed algorithm. The
values of quantities and profits were assigned to the purchased items in all databases
by the two-phase model [16] except foodmart database. Parameters and characteristics
for four databases are respectively described in Tables 1 and 2.
Table 1. Parameters descriptions
#|D| Total number of transactions
#|I| Number of distinct items
AvgLen Average length of transactions
MaxLen Maximal length of transactions
Incrementally Updating High-Utility Itemsets with Transaction Insertion 51
Table 2. Characteristics of used databases
Databases #|D| #|I| AvgLen MaxLen
foodmart 21,556 1,559 4 11
retail 88,162 16,470 10.3 76
chess 3,196 75 37 37
T10I4D100K 100,000 870 10.1 29
5.1 Runtime
Experiments were made to show the runtime of the proposed algorithm compared to
the two-phase and FHM algorithms in batch mode and the other two incremental
algorithms. The runtime includes the construction and mining phases. Experiments
are then conducted to show the comparisons under various minimum utility thresholds
(MUs) with a fixed insertion ratio (IR). The results are shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Runtime under various minimum utility thresholds
From Fig. 3, it can be observed that the proposed algorithm has better performance
than the two-phase and FHM algorithms in batch mode and the incremental
FUP-HUI-INS and PRE-HUI-IN algorithms. The runtime is decreasing along with the
52 J.C.-W. Lin et al.
increasing of MU. The observation is reasonable since less candidates of HUIs are
generated when MU is set higher. When MU is set lower, the gap between the
proposed algorithm and other three algorithms becomes large except the FHM
algorithm, which indicates that the other three algorithms required more runtime than
the proposed algorithm. Since the FHM algorithm uses the similar pruning strategies
as the proposed approach, there is no great difference between them. The FHM is,
however, performed in batch mode, thus requiring database rescan each time when
the transactions are inserted into the original database. Experiments are then
conducted to show the comparisons under different IRs with a fixed MU. The results
are shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Runtime under various insertion ratios
From Fig. 4, it also can observed that the proposed algorithm outperforms the other
algorithms under various IRs. Take an example of Fig. 4(b), the MU is set at 0.15%,
and the IRs are respectively set from 2% to 10%, with 2% increments each time. Two
incremental FUP-HUI-INS and PRE-HUI-INS algorithms have worse performance
than the other algorithms. When the IR is set lower than 8%, the average runtime of
two-phase algorithm is 420 seconds, the FHM is 28 seconds, and the proposed
algorithm is 16 seconds. The runtime of FUP-HUI-INS and PRE-HUI-INS algorithms
exceed 104 seconds. The reason is that FUP-HUI-INS and PRE-HUI-INS algorithms
Incrementally Updating High-Utility Itemsets with Transaction Insertion 53
could have “combination explosion” problem when MU or IR is set lower. This
situation may frequently occur depending on the database characteristics. From the
above results, the other algorithms have worse performance in chess database except
the FHM and the proposed algorithm, which can be easily observed from Fig. 3(c)
and Fig. 4(c). Since the chess belongs to dense database with long patterns in the
transactions, a great amount of HTWUIs are generated by the two-phase, FUP-HUI-
INS and PRE-HUI-INS algorithms.
5.2 Memory Consumption
Memory consumption of the propose algorithm compared to the other algorithms is
then evaluated. Experiments are then conducted to show the comparisons under
various MUs with a fixed IR. The results are shown in Fig. 5.
Fig. 5. Memory consumption under various minimum utility thresholds
From Fig. 5, it can be observed that the FHM and the proposed algorithms requires
steady memory along with the increasing of MUs compared to the other algorithms.
This is because that the FHM and the proposed algorithms are necessary to build the
utility-list structures for keep the itemsets. When MU is set lower, the proposed
algorithm requires fewer memory than the other algorithms, which can be observed
from Fig. 5(a). Experiments are then conducted to show the comparisons under
various IRs with a fixed MU. The results are shown in Fig. 6.
54 J.C.-W. Lin et al.
Fig. 6. Memory consumption under various insertion ratios
From Fig. 6(a), it can be observed that the proposed algorithm requires less
memory than the other incremental algorithms along with the increasing of IRs. From
Fig. 6(b) and (d), it can be observed that the proposed algorithm requires more
memory than the other algorithms. This is reasonable since more itemsets are kept in
the proposed algorithm for later incremental database.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, a novel incremental algorithm is proposed to maintain and update the
built utility-list structures for mining HUIs with transaction insertion. Based on the
utility-list structures, related information in the original database can thus be
compressed. The proposed algorithm also applies the Estimated Utility Co-
Occurrence Structure (EUCS) to keep the information between 2-itemsets, thus
speeding up the computations. Without the level-wise approach for generate-and-test
candidates, HUIs can be easily discovered based on the designed algorithm for the
incremental database. Experimental results show that the performance of the proposed
algorithm outperforms than other algorithms.
Incrementally Updating High-Utility Itemsets with Transaction Insertion 55
Acknowledgement. This research was partially supported by the Shenzhen Peacock
Project, China, under grant KQC201109020055A, by the Natural Scientific Research
Innovation Foundation in Harbin Institute of Technology under grant
HIT.NSRIF.2014100, and by the Shenzhen Strategic Emerging Industries Program
under grant ZDSY20120613125016389.
References
1. Frequent itemset mining dataset repository (2012), http://fimi.ua.ac.be/data/
2. Abdullah, Z., Herawan, T., Deris, M.: Mining Significant Least Association Rules using
Fast SLP-growth Algorithm. In: Kim, T.-h., Adeli, H. (eds.) AST/UCMA/ISA/ACN 2010.
LNCS, vol. 6059, pp. 324–336. Springer, Heidelberg (2010)
3. Agrawal, R., Imielinski, T., Swami, A.: Database Mining: A Performance Perspective.
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 5, 914–925 (1993)
4. Agrawal, R., Srikant, R.: Fast Algorithms for Mining Association Rules in Large
Databases. In: The International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, pp. 487–499
(1994)
5. Agrawal, R., Srikant, R.: Quest synthetic data generator (1994),
http://www.Almaden.ibm.com/cs/quest/syndata.html
6. Ahmed, C.F., Tanbeer, S.K., Jeong, B.S., Lee, Y.K.: Efficient Tree Structures for High
Utility Pattern Mining in Incremental Databases. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering 21, 1708–1721 (2009)
7. Chan, R., Yang, Q., Shen, Y.D.: Mining high utility itemsets. In: IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining, pp. 19–26 (2003)
8. Chen, M.S., Han, J., Yu, P.S.: Data Mining: An Overview from a Database Perspective.
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 8, 866–883 (1996)
9. Cheung, D.W., Han, J., Ng, V., Wong, C.Y.: Maintenance of Discovered Association
Rules in Large Databases: An Incremental Updating Technique. In: International
Conference on Data Engineering, pp. 106–114 (1996)
10. Fournier-Viger, P., Wu, C.W., Zida, S., Tseng, V.S.: FHM: Faster High-Utility Itemset
Mining Using Estimated Utility Co-Occurrence Pruning. Foundations of Intelligent
Systems 8502, 83–92 (2014)
11. Hong, T.P., Lin, C.W., Wu, Y.L.: Incrementally Fast Updated Frequent Pattern Trees.
Expert Systems with Applications 34, 2424–2435 (2008)
12. Lin, C.W., Hong, T.P., Lu, W.H.: An Effective Tree Structure for Mining High Utility
Itemsets. Expert Systems with Applications 38, 7419–7424 (2011)
13. Lin, C.W., Lan, G.C., Hong, T.P.: An Incremental Mining Algorithm for High Utility
Itemsets. Expert Systems with Applications 39, 7173–7180 (2012)
14. Lin, C.W., Hong, T.P., Lan, G.C., Wong, J.W., Lin, W.Y.: Incrementally Mining High
Utility Patterns based on Pre-large Concept. Applied Intelligence 40, 343–357 (2014)
15. Liu, M., Qu, J.: Mining High Utility Iitemsets without Candidate Generation. In: ACM
International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 55–64 (2012)
16. Liu, Y., Liao, W.K., Choudhary, A.: A Two-Phase Algorithm for Fast Discovery of High
Utility Itemsets. In: Ho, T.-B., Cheung, D., Liu, H. (eds.) PAKDD 2005. LNCS (LNAI),
vol. 3518, pp. 689–695. Springer, Heidelberg (2005)
17. Nath, B., Bhattacharyya, D.K., Ghosh, A.: Incremental Association Rule Mining: A
Survey. WIREs Data Mining Knowledge Discovery 3, 157–169 (2013)
56 J.C.-W. Lin et al.
18. Tseng, V.S., Shie, B.E., Wu, C.W., Yu, P.S.: Efficient Algorithms for Mining High Utility
Itemsets from Transactional Databases. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering 25, 1772–1786 (2013)
19. Wu, C.W., Shie, B.E., Yu, P.S., Tseng, V.S.: Mining Top-k High Utility Itemsets. In:
ACM International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 12–16
(2012)
20. Yao, H., Hamilton, H.J.: Mining Itemset Utilities from Transaction Databases. Data &
Knowledge Engineering 59, 603–626 (2006)
