Efficient Incremental High Utility Itemset Mining
Philippe Fournier-Viger Jerry Chun-Wei Lin
UniversityofMoncton HarbinInstituteoftechnology,
Moncton,NB,Canada ShenzhenGrad. School
philippe.fv@gmail.com Shenzhen,China
jerrylin@ieee.org
Ted Gueniche Prashant Barhate
UniversityofMoncton InfosysLtd.
Moncton,NB,Canada Jalgaon,India
ted.gueniche@gmail.com prashantbarhate1990@gmail.com
ABSTRACT dynamic databases [2, 12]. However, these incremental al-
gorithms remain very costly in terms of execution time.
High-utilityitemsetmining(HUIM)intransactiondatabases
In this paper, we address this issue by proposing an algo-
is an important data mining task with wide applications.
rithmnamedEIHI(EfficientIncrementalHigh-utilityItem-
However,mostHUIMalgorithmsassumetheunrealisticas-
setminer),whichintroducesseveralnovelideastoefficiently
sumption that databases are static. To address this issue,
maintain high-utility itemsets in dynamic databases.
algorithmshavebeendesignedtomaintainhigh-utilityitem-
sets in dynamic databases. However, these incremental al-
gorithmsstillremainverycostlyintermsofexecutiontime. 2. PROBLEMDEFINITION
Inthispaper,weaddressthisproblembyproposinganalgo-
LetI beafinitesetofitems(symbols). AnitemsetX isa
rithmnamedEIHI(EfficientIncrementalHigh-utilityItem-
finitesetofitemssuchthatX ⊆I. Atransactiondatabaseis
setminer),whichintroducesseveralideastomoreefficiently
a set of transactions D={T ,T ,...,T } such that for each
maintain high-utility itemsets in dynamic databases. An 1 2 n
transactionT ,T ⊆I andT hasauniqueidentifierccalled
experimental study on four datasets shows that EIHI is up c c c
its TID (Transaction ID). Each item i ∈ I is associated
to two orders of magnitude faster than the state-of-the-art
with a positive number p(i), called its external utility (e.g.
HUI-LIST-INS algorithm.
unitprofit). EveryitemiappearinginatransactionT has
c
a positive number q(i,T ), called its internal utility (e.g.
c
CCSConcepts
purchase quantity).
Forexample,considerthedatabaseinTable1,whichwill
•Information systems → Data mining;
be used as the running example in the rest of this paper.
Transaction T indicates that items a, c, e and g appear in
Keywords 2
this transaction with an internal utility of respectively 2, 6,
High-utility itemset mining; incremental pattern mining 2 and 5. Table 2 indicates that external utilities of these
items are respectively 5, 1, 3 and 1.
1. INTRODUCTION The utility of an item i in a transaction T c is denoted as
u(i,T ) and defined as p(i)×q(i,T ) if i∈T . The utility
High-Utility Itemset Mining (HUIM) [2, 3, 8, 14] is an c c c
of an itemset X in a transaction T is denoted as u(X,T )
emerging data mining task that extends Frequent Itemset (cid:80) c c
anddefinedasu(X,T )= u(i,T )ifX ⊆T . Theutil-
Mining (FIM) [1] by considering the case where items can c i∈X c c
ityofanitemset X inadatabaseDisdenotedasu(X)and
appear more than once in each transaction and where each (cid:80)
definedasu(X)= u(X,T ),whereg(X)istheset
item has a weight (e.g. unit profit). Therefore, it can be Tc∈g(X) c
of transactions containing X. For example, u({a,c},T ) =
used to discover itemsets having a high-utility (e.g. high 2
16andu({a,c})=28. AnitemsetX isahigh-utilityitemset
profit), that is High-Utility Itemsets (HUIs). Several algo-
if its utility u(X) is no less than a user-specified minimum
rithms have been proposed to mine high-utility itemsets in
utility threshold minutil given by the user (i.e. u(X) ≥
transaction databases [2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 14]. However, most of
minutil). Otherwise,Xisalow-utilityitemset. Theproblem
them assume that databases are static. A few algorithms
of high-utility itemset mining inadatabaseD istodiscover
have been designed for maintaining high-utility itemsets in
the set H of all high-utility itemsets [3, 8, 14].
Forexample,ifminutil=30,thehigh-utilityitemsetsare
Permissiontomakedigitalorhardcopiesofallorpartofthisworkforpersonalor {b,d},{a,c,e},{b,c,d},{b,c,e},{b,d,e},{b,c,d,e},{a,b,c,
classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcita- d, e, f} with respectively a utility of 30, 31, 34, 31, 36, 40
tiononthefirstpage. Copyrightsforcomponentsofthisworkownedbyothersthan and 30.
ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orre-
publish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermission
and/orafee.Requestpermissionsfrompermissions@acm.org. Definition 1. The problem of maintaining high-utility
ASEBD&SI2015,October7-9,2015,Taiwan itemsetsinadynamicdatabaseisdefinedasfollows[12]. Let
beadatabaseD. AdatabaseD(cid:48) isanupdate of database D
(cid:13)c 2015ACM.ISBN978-1-4503-3735-9/15/10...$15.00
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818869.2818887 if D(cid:48) =D∪N, where N is a non empty set of transactions
for HUIM. In HUI-Miner and FHM, each itemset is associ-
Table 1: A Transaction Database D
ated with a structure named utility-list [3, 8]. Utility-lists
TID Transaction
allow calculating the utility of an itemset by making join
T (a,1)(c,1)(d,1)
1 operations with utility-lists of smaller itemsets.
T (a,2)(c,6)(e,2)(g,5)
2 Utility-lists are defined as follows. Let (cid:31) be a total or-
T (a,1)(b,2)(c,1)(d,6)(e,1)(f,5)
3 der on items from I, and X be an itemset. The remaining
T (b,4)(c,3)(d,3)(e,1)
4 utility of X in a transaction T is defined as re(X,T ) =
T 5 (b,2)(c,2)(e,1)(g,2) (cid:80) u(i,T ). The ut c ility-list of an itemset X c in
i∈Tc∧i(cid:31)x∀x∈X c
a database D is a set of tuples such that there is a tuple
(c,iutil,rutil) for each transaction T containing X. The
Table 2: External Utility Values c
iutil and rutil elements of a tuple respectively are the util-
Item a b c d e f g
ityofX inT (u(X,T ))andtheremainingutilityofX inT
Profit 5 2 1 2 3 1 1 c c c
(re(X,T )). Forexample,assumethelexicographicalorder.
c
The utility-list of {a,e} is {(T ,16,5), (T ,8,5)}.
2 3
To discover high-utility itemsets, HUI-Miner and FHM
such that N (cid:54)⊆ D. Let minutil, D and H, respectively be
perform a database scan to create utility-lists of patterns
auser-specifiedminimumutility threshold, adatabase, and
containing single items. Then, larger patterns are obtained
the set of high-utility itemsets found in D. Let D(cid:48) be an
by joining utility-lists of smaller patterns [8]. Pruning the
update of database D. The problem of incremental high-
search space and calculating the utility of an itemset is re-
utility itemset mining is to find H(cid:48) the set of high-utility
spectively done using the following properties.
itemsets in D(cid:48), given minutil, D and H.
Property 2 (Pruning using utility-lists). Let X
Forexample,considerDtobethedatabaseoftherunning
be an itemset. Let the extensions of X be the itemsets that
example and minutil=30. Let D(cid:48) be the database D that
canbeobtainedbyappendinganitemitoX suchthati(cid:31)x,
is updated by inserting transaction T = (a,2)(b,5)(f,10).
6 ∀x∈X. The remaining utility upper-bound of X is defined
In the updated database D(cid:48), the high-utility itemsets are
as reu(X) = u(X)+re(X), and can be computed by sum-
{b,d},{a,c,e},{b,c,d},{b,c,e},{b,d,e},{b,c,d,e},{a,b,c,
ming the iutil and rutil values in the utility-list of X. If
d,e,f}and{d},whichrespectivelyhaveautilityof50,31,
reu(X) < minutil, then X is a low-utility itemset as well
34, 31, 36, 40, 30 and 30. In this example, the problem of
as all its extensions [8].
incrementalhigh-utilityitemset{d}miningistofindthata
new high-utility itemset exists in D(cid:48) and that the utility of Property 3 (Utility using utility-list). The util-
itemset {b,d} has been updated to 50. ity of an itemset X can be calculated as the sum of theiutil
values in its utility-list [8].
3. RELATEDWORK
Tomaintainhigh-utilityitemsetsindatabaseswherenew
HUIM is harder than FIM since the utility is not mono-
transactions are inserted, IHUP [2] was proposed. Then,
tonicoranti-monotonic[2,14],i.e. theutilityofanitemset
theFUP-HUI-INS[10]andthePRE-HUI-INS[11]werepro-
may be lower, equal or higher than the utility of its sub-
posed to update the discovered high-utility itemsets based
sets. Thus,strategiesusedinFIMtoprunethesearchspace
on the FUP concept and pre-large concept, respectively. A
based on the anti-monotonicity of the frequency cannot be
limitationofthesealgorithmsisthattheyaretwophaseal-
applied to the utility measure to discover high-utility item-
gorithms, and thus generate a large amount of candidates.
sets. Several HUIM algorithms circumvent this problem by
To avoid this problem, a one-phase algorithm named HUI-
overestimating the utility of itemsets using the TWU mea-
LIST-INS was proposed [12] that extends the FHM algo-
sure[2,14],whichisanti-monotonic. Thetransactionutility
(cid:80) rithm. It is to our knowledge the state-of-the-art algorithm
of a transaction T is defined as TU(T ) = u(x,T ).
c c x∈Tc c for incremental high utility itemset mining.
Thetransaction-weightedutilization(TWU)ofanitemsetX
(cid:80)
is defined as TWU(X) = TU(T ). For example,
Tc∈g(X) c 4. THEEIHIALGORITHM
consideritema. TWU(a)=TU(T )+TU(T )+TU(T )=
1 2 3
8+27+30 = 65. The following property of the TWU is In this section, we present our proposal, the EIHI algo-
used to prune the search space. rithm. We first describe the main procedure, which is in-
spiredbytheFHM[3]algorithm. Thisprocedureisabatch
Property 1 (Pruning using the TWU). For any algorithm. We then explain how it is adapted to maintain
itemset X, if TWU(X) < minutil, then X is a low-utility HUIs in an updated database. We call this new algorithm
itemset as well as all its supersets. the EIHI algorithm. The main procedure (Algorithm 1)
takesasinputatransactiondatabasewithutilityvaluesand
Two phase algorithms such as IHUP [2], UP-Growth+ theminutilthreshold. Thealgorithmscansthedatabaseto
[14],PB[7],andBAHUI[13]utilizeproperty1toprunethe calculate the TWU of each item. Then, it identifies the set
search space. Those algorithms however suffers from the I∗ of all items having a TWU no less than minutil. The
problem of generating a large amount of candidates. Re- TWU values of items are then used to establish a total or-
cently, algorithms that mine high-utility itemsets using a der(cid:31)onitems,whichistheorderofascendingTWUvalues
single phase and avoid the problem of candidate generation [3, 8]. A second database scan is then performed.Items in
were proposed, such as HUI-Miner [8] and FHM [3], which transactions are reordered according to (cid:31), the utility-list
were shown to outperform state-of-the-art two phase algo- of each item i ∈ I∗ is built and a structure named EUCS
rithms. FHMistoourknowledgethecurrentbestalgorithm is built [3]. This structure stores the TWU of all pairs of
items {a,b} such that u({a,b}) (cid:54)= 0. Then, the depth-first Algorithm 2: The Search Procedure
searchexplorationofitemsetsstartsbycallingtherecursive
input : P: an itemset, ExtensionsOfP: a set of
procedureSearchwiththeemptyitemset∅,thesetofsingle
extensions of P, the minutil threshold, the
items I∗, minutil and the EUCS.
EUCS structure
output: the set of high-utility itemsets
Algorithm 1: The EIHI Algorithm
1 foreach itemset Px∈ExtensionsOfP do
input : D: a transaction database, minutil: a
2 if SUM(Px.utilitylist.iutils) ≥minutil then
user-specified threshold
output Px;
output: the set of high-utility itemsets
3 if SUM(Px.utilitylist.iutils)+
1 Scan D to calculate the TWU of single items; 4 SUM(Px.utilitylist.rutils)≥minutil then
2 I∗ ← each item i such that TWU(i)≥minutil; 5 ExtensionsOfPx←∅;
3 Let (cid:31) be the total order of TWU ascending values on 6 foreach itemset Py∈ExtensionsOfP such that
I∗; y(cid:31)x do
4 Scan D to build the utility-list of each item i∈I∗ and 7 if TWU({x,y})≥minutil) then
build the EUCS structure; 8 Pxy←Px∪Py;
5 Search (∅, I∗, minutil, EUCS); 9 Pxy.utilitylist← Construct
(P,Px,Py);
10 ExtensionsOfPx←ExtensionsOfPx ∪
TheSearchprocedure(Algorithm2)takesasinput(1)an
Pxy;
itemsetP,(2)extensionsofP havingtheformPz meaning
11 end
that Pz was previously obtained by appending an item z
12 end
to P, (3) minutil and (4) the EUCS. The search procedure
13 Search (Px, ExtensionsOfPx, minutil);
operates as follows. For each extension Px of P, if the sum
of the iutil values of the utility-list of Px is no less than 14 end
minutil, then Px is a high-utility itemset and it is output 15 end
(cf. property3). Then,ifthesumofiutilandrutilvaluesin
theutility-listofPxarenolessthanminutil,itmeansthat
extensionsofPxshouldbeexplored(cf. property2). Thisis
f},havingutilitiesofrespectively30,31,34,31,36,40and
performed by merging Px with all extensions Py of P such
30.
thaty(cid:31)xandTWU({x,y})≥minutil,toformextensions
Inserting an itemset P in the HUI-trie structure is very
of the form Pxy containing |Px|+1 items. The utility-
efficient,asitrequirestotraverse/create|P|+1nodesinthe
list of Pxy is then constructed as in FHM by calling the
tree (starting from the root). Searching for an itemset P in
Construct procedure (cf. Algorithm 3) to join the utility-
the HUI-trie structure is also very efficient. It requires to
lists of P, Px and Py [3]. Then, a recursive call to the
onlytraverseonepathinthetree. Furthermore,toincrease
Search procedure with Pxy is done to calculate its utility
efficiencyofsearchingintheHUI-trie,thelistofchildnodes
and explore its extension(s). The Search procedure starts
of each node is sorted according to the total order (cid:31). This
from single items and recursively explores the search space
allowstoperformabinarysearchateachnodewhenlooking
to discover all high-utility itemsets [3].
for the child node corresponding to a given item.
We next explain how the algorithm is modified to main-
tain high-utility itemsets in a dynamic database. We first
introduce a few novel and very important ideas.
The HUI-tree structure. The first important idea is
the following. Let be an update D(cid:48) of a database D, such
that D(cid:48) = D∪N, where N is a non empty set of transac-
tions. Itcanbeobservedthatthesetofhigh-utilityitemsets
H(cid:48) foundinD(cid:48) isalwaysasupersetofthesetofhigh-utility
itemsets H found in D. Moreover, it can be observed that
the utilities of itemsets in H may only increase or stay the
same in H(cid:48) as a result of the insertion of the new transac-
tions. For example, in the running example, the utility of
itemset{b,d}isupdatedfrom30to50whentransactionT
6
isadded. Itisthusimportanttohaveanefficientmechanism
forstoringitemsetsfoundinH tobeabletoquicklyupdate
their utility. The solution adopted in EIHI to this problem
istostoreallitemsetsfromH inatrie-likestructurethatwe
call the HUI-trie. This structure is a trie, where each node
representsanitemandeachitemsetisrepresentedbyapath
starting from the tree root and ending by an inner node or
aleaf. Moreover,eachnoderepresentingthelastitemofan
itemsetisannotatedwiththeutilityofthatitemset. Forex-
ample, Fig. 1 show the HUI-trie structure contructed with
the HUIs found in the database of Table 1, that is {b,d},
{a,c,e}, {b,c,d}, {b,c,e}, {b,d,e}, {b,c,d,e}, {a,b,c, d, e, Figure 1: The HUI-trie structure
Algorithm 3: The Construct Procedure items. But in the database D(cid:48) some new items may appear
and the TWU of items may change, wich may lead to a
input : P: an itemset, Px: the extension of P with an
different total order. To ensure that the pruning properties
item x, Py: the extension of P with an item y
still hold, it is necessary to use a total order for D(cid:48) that
output: the utility-list of Pxy
is compatible with the total order used for D. Thus, the
1 UtilityListOfPxy←∅; algorithm is modified to keep the total order from D into
2 foreach tuple ex∈Px.utilitylist do memoryandonlyinsertthenewitemsfromD(cid:48) inthistotal
3 if ∃ey∈Py.utilitylist and ex.tid=exy.tid then order.
4 if P.utilitylist(cid:54)=∅ then The fourth modification is to how utility-lists are con-
5 Search element e∈P.utilitylist such that structed for each item in I∗ in Line 4 of Algorithm 1. A
e.tid=ex.tid.; naiveapproachwouldbetobuildtheutility-listofeachitem
6 exy← in I∗ for D(cid:48) from scratch, which would require to scan all
(ex.tid,ex.iutil+ey.iutil−e.iutil,ey.rutil); transactionsinD(cid:48). However,sincethealgorithmwasprevi-
7 end ously run on D, the utility-lists of items in D have already
8 else beenbuilt. Therefore,itisonlynecessarytoaddelementsin
9 exy←(ex.tid,ex.iutil+ey.iutil,ey.rutil); utility-listsfortransactionsinN. Inourimplementation,we
10 end thusassigntoeachitemtwoutility-lists: (1)autility-listfor
11 UtilityListOfPxy← D, and (2) a utility-list for N. Using these two utility-lists
UtilityListOfPxy∪{exy}; is equivalent to using a single utility-list for D(cid:48). To build
12 end the utility-lists for N, only transactions from N are read.
13 end The fifth modification is to how the EUCS structure is
14 return UtilityListPxy; builtinLine4ofAlgorithm1. Anaiveapproachforbuilding
the EUCS would be to construct it for D(cid:48) by scanning the
whole database D(cid:48). A better approach is to update the
EUCS by scanning only the transactions N and adding the
Efficiently mining the updated database. The sec-
transactionutilitiesofitemsappearinginthesetransactions
ond important idea in the EIHI algorithm is about how to
totheTWUofpairsofitemsstoredintheEUCStoobtain
efficiently mine itemsets in D(cid:48). For the original database
the updated TWU of each pair of items.
D, one only needs to apply Algorithm 1 to find the set of
The sixth modification is with respect to how the algo-
high-utility itemsets H. However, how to find the set H(cid:48) in
rithm determines if an itemset is high-utility. Algorithm 2
D(cid:48), given D and H? A naive solution would be to apply
is modified as follows. Let ul (Px) denotes the utility-list
Algorithm1ondatabaseD(cid:48). However,thiswouldbeineffi- D
of an itemset Px in transactions D. Line 2 is modified by
cientsinceitwouldminehigh-utilityitemsetsfromscratch.
checkingifthesumofiutilsvaluesinul (Px)plusthesum
D
Moreover,anotherreasonisthatnumerousitemsetsappear-
oftheiutilsvaluesinul (Px)isgreaterthanminutil. This
ing in D may not appear in D(cid:48). This lead to the following N
conditionistoensurethatonlyitemsetsthatarehigh-utility
important property, which was not used in HUI-LIST-INS. in D(cid:48) are output.
The seventh modification is Line 5 of the Search proce-
Property 4. Let be an itemset x ∈ H appearing in D
dure. This pruning condition is modified as if the sum of
but not appearing in N, where D(cid:48) =D∪N. The utility of
iutils and rutils values in ul (Px) plus the sum of the iu-
x in D(cid:48) is the same as the utility of x in D. Thus, if x is a D
tils and rutils values in ul (Px) is greater than minutil.
high-utility itemset in D, it is also a high-utility itemset in N
Thisistoensurethananitemsetanditsextensionsareonly
D(cid:48). Similarly, if x is a low-utility itemset in D, it is also a
pruned if the sum of iutil and rutil values in D(cid:48) is no less
low-utility itemset in D(cid:48).
than minutil (according to property 2). This pruning con-
dition is formalized as follows.
Based on property 4, to design an efficient algorithm to
find H(cid:48), one should avoid exploring itemsets not appearing Property 5 (Pruning condition 1). For any item-
in N. We next explain how this idea is implemented in
set Px, if the the sum of iutils and rutils values in ul (Px)
EIHI. The first modification is to the TWU calculation of D
plus the sum of the iutils and rutils values in ul (Px) is
single items in Line 1 of Algorithm 1. When the algorithm N
lessthanminutil,thenPxanditsextensionsarelow-utility
is run on D(cid:48), the TWU of items in D has been already
itemsets.
calculated when the algorithm was run on D. By keeping
thisinformation,itisonlynecessarytoscantransactionsin
The eight modification is a new pruning condition. In
N to update the TWU of all items and obtai the TWU of
Algorithm1,theutility-listofanitemsetPxy iscreatedby
items in D(cid:48).
combining the utility-lists of itemsets P, Px and Py using
The second modification is to how the algorithm deter-
theConstructprocedure. InEIHI,eachitemsethasutility-
minethesetofitemI∗ tobeusedforgeneratingitemsetsin
list for D and a utility-list for N. Thus, the Construct
Line2ofAlgorithm1. ThesetI∗ isredefinedbyaddingthe
procedurehastobecalledtwicetoconstructtheutility-lists
condition that items from I∗ must appear in N. In other
ofPxy forD andN. Anovelpruningconditionintroduced
words, items that are appearing in D but not in N are not
in EIHI is the following.
used to generate itemsets (based on property 4).
The third modification is to how the (cid:31) order is defined Property 6 (Pruning condition 2). For any item-
in Line 3 of Algorithm 1. As previously explained, when setPxy,iftheutility-listofPxy inN isempty(ul (Pxy)),
N
the algorithm is run on D, a total order (cid:31) is established then the itemset Pxy and all its extension do not need to be
on items from D based on the order of increasing TWU of explored.
Rationale. If the utility-list of Pxy is empty, it means of 1,000 transactions, EIHI-5 indicates the performance of
that Pxy does not appear in N. By property 4, it is thus EIHIwhenitisappliedfivetimes(totransactions1to200,
not necessary to consider Pxy. Since Pxy does not appear 201 to 400, 401 to 600, 601 to 800 and 801 to 1,000). The
in N, it follows that extensions of Pxy also do not appear comparison of execution times is shown in Fig. 2.
in N. Thus, any extension of Pxy also do not need to be It can be oserved that EIHI is always considerably faster
explored. than HUI-LIST-INS on all datasets for the same number of
The above pruning condition is incorporated in Line 11 updates and minutil values (up to 220 times faster than
of the Searchprocedure. If the utility-list ofPxy is empty, HUI-LIST-INS).Thelargestgapintermsofexecutiontime
thenPxyisnotaddedtothesetExtensionsOfPx. Thanks between EIHI and HUI-LIST-INS is for the real shopping
to this condition, only itemsets that appears in N will be datasets (retail and foodmart). For dense datasets, the gap
consideredbythesearchprocedure. Afurtheroptimization issmallerbecauseitemsappearinalmosteverytransactions
is to construct the utility-list of Pxy in N first before con- and thus the pruning condition of EIHI is less effective.
structing the utility-list of Pxy in D. If the utility-list of It can also be oserved that the gap in terms of execu-
Pxy in N is empty, the utility-list of Pxy in D does not tion time between the proposed EIHI algorithm and HUI-
need to be constructed. LIST-INS increases considerably as the number of update
Theninthimportantmodificationistohowahigh-utility increases. For example, on foodmart with 5, 25 and 50 up-
itemset Px is output in Line 3 of the Search procedure. dates, the EIHI algorithm is respectively 16, 124 and 220
For each high-utility itemset Px that is found, the EIHI times faster than HUI-LIST-INS.
algorithmfirstsearchifthisitemsetisintheproposedHUI- In terms of memory usage, EIHI has very similar mem-
triestructure. Ifyes,itmeansthatPxwaspreviouslyfound ory usage to HUI-LIST-INS. The reason is that both algo-
when the algorithm was applied to D. In that case, the rithm are utility-list based algorithms based on the FHM
utilityofPxisupdatedintheHUI-trie. Otherwise,itmeans algorithm and that the new pruning conditions introduced
thatPxisanewhigh-utilityitemsetthatwaslow-utilityin in EIHI are designed to reduce execution time rather than
D. Thus, Px is inserted in the HUI-trie with its calculated memory usage. For retail, foodmart, chess, mushroom and
utility. When the algorithm terminates, all updated HUIs T10I6D100K,themaximummemoryusageofthealgorithms
are in the HUI-trie. isrespectivelyabout500MB,200MB,100,500and800MB.
Thetenthmodificationisthatattheendofthealgorithm,
theutility-listsinDandinN aremergedtogethertoforma 6. CONCLUSION
singleutility-listforD(cid:48). Thisistopreparethealgorithmfor
We have presented EIHI, a novel algorithm for maintain-
the next execution where the database D(cid:48) will be updated.
inghigh-utilityitemsetsindynamicdatabases. Itintroduces
Finally, the last modification is to incorporate the LA-
numerousideastomoreefficientlymaintainhigh-utilityitem-
prune optimization, which was proposed in HUP-Miner [9],
sets in dynamic databases. Experimental results show that
in the Construct procedure. This optimization is compati-
EIHIisuptotwoordersofmagnitudefasterthanthestate-
blewithanyutility-listbasedalgorithmandisnotmodified
of-art HUI-LIST-INS algorithm and is more scalable with
here. Therefore,itisnotdescribedandtheinterestedreader
respect to the number of updates. The source code of the
can refer to the paper about HUP-Miner for more details.
EIHI and HUI-LIST-INS algorithms as well as all datasets
Basedontheaboveexplanationsandproperties,itiseasy
used in this paper are available as part of the SPMF open-
to see that the algorithm is correct and complete for the
source data mining library http://goo.gl/rIKIub.
problem of incremental high-utility itemset mining.
Forfuturework,weplantoexploreotherproblemrelated
to the maintenance of patterns in dynamic databases. In
5. EXPERIMENTALEVALUATION
particular,weareinterestedinmininghigh-utilitysequential
Experiments were performed on a computer with a third pattern [15] and sequential rules [16].
generation64bitCorei5processorrunningWindows7and8
GBofRAM.WecomparedtheperformanceofEIHIwiththe 7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
state-of-the-artalgorithmHUI-LIST-INS.Experimentswere
ThisresearchwaspartiallysupportedbytheNaturalSci-
carried on four datasets.Let NT, NI and AL respectively
entific Research Innovation Foundation in Harbin Institute
denote the number of transactions, number of items and
ofTechnologyundergrantHIT.NSRIF.2014100,bytheTen-
average transaction length of a dataset.
centProjectundergrantCCF-TencentRAGR20140114,and
The datasets are retail (NT = 88,162, NI = 16,470,
bytheNationalNaturalScienceFoundationofChina(NSFC)
AL = 10.3), foodmart (NT = 4,141, NI = 1,559, AL =
under grant No.61503092.
4.4), chess (NT = 3,196, NI = 75, AL = 35), and mush-
room (NT = 8,124, NI = 120, AL = 23). The foodmart
8. REFERENCES
dataset contains real utility values. For the other datasets,
externalutilitiesandinternalutilitieswererespectivelygen- [1] R. Agrawal and R. Srikant. Fast algorithms for mining
eratedinthe[1,1000]and[1,5]intervalsasinpreviouswork association rules in large databases. In Proc. Intern.
[2, 3, 8, 14]. Conf. Very Large Databases, pages 487–499. 1994.
Algorithms were run on each dataset, while decreasing [2] C. F. Ahmed, S. K. Tanbeer, B.-S. Jeong and Y.-K.
the minutil threshold until a clear winner was observed. Lee. Efficient tree structures for high-utility pattern
Furthermore, for each dataset, we run each algorithm three mining in incremental databases. IEEE Trans. Knowl.
times for each minutil value to test a different number of Data Eng, 21(12):1708–1721, 2009.
updates to the database. The notation Y-x indicates that [3] P. Fournier-Viger, C.-W. Wu, S. Zida and V. S. Tseng.
the algorithm Y was run x times on a given dataset by FHM: Faster high-utility itemset mining using
splittingthedatasetintoxparts. Forexample,foradataset estimated utility co-occurrence pruning. In Proc. 21st
retail foodmart
1000 1000
)s
100
(
e
m 100 )s 10
itn
u
( e
m
R itn 1
u
R
10
10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
minutil
minutil
chess mushroom
1000 1000
800 800
)s
( e m 600
)s
( e m 600
itn
u R 2
4
0
0
0
0 itn
u R 2
40
0
0
0
500000 550000 600000 650000 700000 100000 200000 300000 400000
minutil minutil
EIHI-5 EIHI_25 EIHI_50
HUI-LIST-INS-5 HUI-LIST-INS_25 HUI-LIST-INS-50
Figure 2: Comparison of execution times
Intern. Symp. on Methodologies for Intell. Syst., Transaction Insertion. In Proc. 10th Intern. Conf. on
pages 83–9. 2014. Advanced Data Mining and Appl., pages 44–56. 2014.
[4] P. Fournier-Viger, A. Gomariz, T. Gueniche, A. [13] W. Song, Y. Liu and J. Li. BAHUI: Fast and memory
Soltani, C.-W. Wu. and V. S. Tseng. SPMF: a Java efficient mining of high utility itemsets based on
Open-Source Pattern Mining Library. Journal of bitmap. Intern. Journal of Data Warehousing and
Machine Learning Research, 15:3389–3393, 2014. Mining, 10(1):1–15, 2014.
[5] P.Fournier-VigerandS.Zida.FOSHU:FasterOn-Shelf [14] V. S. Tseng, B.-E. Shie, C.-W. Wu and P. S. Yu.
High Utility Itemset MiningaˆA˘S¸ with or without Efficient algorithms for mining high utility itemsets
negative unit profit. In Proc. 30th Symposium on from transactional databases. IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Applied Computing, pages 857–864. 2015. Data Eng., 25(8):1772–1786, 2013.
[6] P. Fournier-Viger, C. W. Wu and V. S. Tseng. Novel [15] J. Yin, Z. Zheng, L. Cao, Y. Song and W. Wei.
Concise Representations of High Utility Itemsets using Efficiently mining top-K high utility sequential
Generator Patterns. In 10th Intern. Conf. on Advanced patterns. In Proc. IEEE 13th Intern. Conf. on Data
Data Mining and Applications, pages 30–43. 2014. Mining, pages 1259–1264. 2013.
[7] G. C. Lan, T. P., Hong and V. S. Tseng. An efficient [16] S. Zida, P. Fournier-Viger, C.-W. Wu, J. C.-W. Lin
projection-based indexing approach for mining high and V. S. Tseng. Efficient mining of high utility
utility itemsets. Knowl. and Inform. Syst., sequential rules. In Proc. 11th Intern. Conf. Machine
38(1):85–107, 2014. Learning and Data Mining, pages 1–15. 2015.
[8] M. Liu and J. Qu. Mining high utility itemsets without
candidategeneration.InProc. 22nd ACM Intern. Conf.
Info. and Know. Management, pages 55–64. 2012.
[9] S. Krishnamoorthy. Pruning strategies for mining high
utility itemsets. Expert Systems with Applications,
42(5):2371–2381, 2015.
[10] J. C.-W. Lin, G. C. Lan and T. P. Hong. An
Incremental Mining Algorithm for High Utility
Itemsets. Expert Systems with Applications,
39:7173aˆA˘S¸-7180, 2012.
[11] J. C.-W. Lin, T. P. Hong, G. C. Lan, J. W. Wong and
W. Y. Lin. Incrementally Mining High Utility Patterns
based on Pre-large Concept. Applied Intelligence,
40:343–347, 2014.
[12] J. C.-W. Lin, W. Gan, T.P. Hong and J. S. Pan.
Incrementally Updating High-Utility Itemsets with
