Efficient Skyline Itemsets Mining
Vikram Goyal Ashish Sureka Dhaval Patel
IIITDelhi,India SoftwareAnalyticsResearch IITRoorkee,India
vikram@iiitd.ac.in Lab(SARL),India patelfec@iitr.ac.in
ashish@iiitd.ac.in
ABSTRACT
Table 1: An Example Database
Utility Mining (UM) in context of Market Basket Analy- TID Transactions TU
sis consists of mining itemsets from a transaction database 1 (A,1) (C,1) (D,1) (H,1) 9
guided by optimizing utility. For example, UM consists of
2 (A,2) (C,6) (E,2) (G,5) 27
extractingallitemsetsinatransactiondatabasehavingutil-
3 (A,1) (B,2) (C,1) (D,6) (E,1) (F,5) 30
ityaboveauser-definedminimumthresholdorminingTop-
4 (B,4) (C,3) (D,3) (E,1) 20
K high utility itemset. Similarly, Frequent Itemset Mining
5 (B,2) (C,2) (E,1) (G,2) 11
(FIM) finds frequent patterns using a frequency threshold.
6 (A,1) (C,1) (D,1) (I,1) 33
However, none of these pattern mining methods determine
patterns that are interesting in both the aspects of utility
and frequency. In addition these methods require a user to
specify respective thresholds. In this paper, we present a
Table 2: Item Utility Table
novelframeworkformininganewpatterncalledasUtility-
item Ext. Utility
Frequency Skyline Pattern. We formalize our problem as a
A 5
patternsearchproblemandproposeanefficienttechniqueon
B 2
recentlyproposedpopulardatastructurecalledasUP Tree
C 1
(Utility-Pattern Tree). The proposed algorithm consists of
D 2
twophasescalledasFilterandRefine. IntheFilterphase,a
E 3
setofcandidateitemsetsaremined,whicharethenverified
F 1
finallyintheRefinephase. Westudytheeffectivenessofour
G 1
proposed algorithm along with two heuristics and conclude
H 1
that our proposed method is efficient.
I 25
CategoriesandSubjectDescriptors
H.2.8 [Database Applications]: Data mining
example,inthescenarioofmarketbasketdataanalysis,fre-
quentitemsetsminingalgorithmsdiscoveritemsetsthatoc-
Keywords cur frequently in a database of transactions, whereas high
utility itemsets mining algorithms discover itemsets with
Association Rule Mining, FP-Tree, Multi-Objective Opti-
utility higher than a given threshold value in a transaction
mization,Utility-BasedDataMining,Utility-FrequencySky-
database. However,bothofthesepatternsdonotsatisfythe
line Itemsets
requirement of a user who is interested in itemsets that are
eitherfrequentlysoldorresultintohighprofitsalesorboth.
1. INTRODUCTION For satisfying such user requirements, we define a new type
There has been done a lot of work done on both frequent of pattern called Skyline Frequent-Utility Itemsets.
itemsetmining[1,5]andhighutilityitemsetmining[2,4,9, Frequentitemsetsmininghasbeenanactiveresearchtopic
7, 11, 6]. Extensive studies for both of these patterns show formanyyears. However,theremaybemanyitemsetswhich
theirinterestingnesswithrespecttomanyapplications. For are not frequent but have high utility. To fix this problem,
a new type of itemsets pattern called high utility pattern
was introduced in [3]. High utility pattern determines the
Permissiontomakedigitalorhardcopiesofallorpartofthisworkforpersonalor
itemsets with utility no less than a user defined threshold.
classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcita- Whereas,theutilityofanitemisdefinedusingitsinterested-
tiononthefirstpage. Copyrightsforcomponentsofthisworkownedbyothersthan ness(profitabilityorimportance)value. Theutilityofitems
ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orre-
in a transaction is derived by multiplying two parameters:
publish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermission
and/orafee.Requestpermissionsfrompermissions@acm.org. (1)theexternalutilityofanitemwhichreferstotheitem’s
C3S2E2015,July13-15,2015,Yokohama,Japan importance,and(2)quantityofitemsinthetransaction. An
itemsetiscalledhighutilityitemsetifitsaggregatedutility
(cid:13)c 2015ACM.ISBN978-1-4503-3419-8/15/07...$15.00
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2790798.2790816 over the set of transaction is above a given or pre-defined
threshold. Similar to frequent itemsets mining, high util- patternwithoutcandidategeneration. Theyproposeadata
ity mining is alsoapplicable toa wide range of applications structure called as FP-Tree (Frequent Pattern Tree) which
such as marketing in stores, website click stream analysis. is an extended prefix tree structure for storing information
However, if a user is interested in both frequent and high requiredbythedepth-firstsearchtravelalgorithm[5]. Other
utilityitemsetsthenboththesepatternsalonefailtosatisfy variantsofitemsetminingproblemthathavebeenproposed
the requirement. In addition, all these techniques require a in the literature are High utility itemset mining, top-k fre-
user to specify a threshold which is itself a difficult task. quentitemsetminingandhighutility-frequentitemsetmin-
Inviewofthis,weintroduceanewpatterncalledskyline ing.
frequent-utility (SFU) itemsets. An itemset X will be in There are multiple algorithms proposed for high-utility
SFU set if there is no other itemset in the database that itemset mining including Two-Phase [12], IHUP [2], UP-
has both higher utility as well as higher frequency than X. Growth [9] and UP-Growth+ [10]. IHUP and Two-Phase
Consider a database of transactions consisting of items A, algorithms run in two phases where first phase generates
B, ..., F in Table 1 and items utilities in Table 2. Itemsets candidate itemsets which are verified in the second phase.
{C}, {A,C}, {A,C,D}, {B,C,D,E} will be SFU itemsets in Howeverduetolargesetofcandidatesgenerationinthefirst
ourexample,astheredoesnotexistanyotheritemsetX in phase, both of these algorithms do not perform efficiently.
the example database that dominate any of these itemsets OntheotherhandUP-GrowthandUP-growth+algorithms
in frequency and utility values. use an efficient data structure called UP-Growth tree (ex-
However,miningSFUitemsetsfromatransactiondatabase plained later in the section) to generate candidate itemsets
isadifficulttasksinceithastoconsidertwodimensionsto- whose size is comparatively much smaller than Two-Phase
gether, i.e. frequency and utility, while classifying an item- andIHUPkindofalgorithmsandhenceachievebetterper-
set as a SFU. The difficulty arises due to existence of cases formance. These algorithms use some heuristics namely
where an itemset is frequent but does not have high utility, DGU, DGN, DLU and DLN that prune out useless nodes
and the cases where an itemset is of high utility but does anddecreaseutilitiesatnodessoastoresultintolessnum-
nothavehighfrequency. Existingworkshowsthatfrequent ber of candidate itemset generation. We also use UP-tree
patterns have downward closure property which is violated for our algorithm and find skyline itemsets. However, none
inthecaseofhighutilitypattern,whichmakessearchingof of the above algorithm can be directly used to determine
SFU pattern further difficult. A naive approach for discov- SFU patterns.
eringSFUpatternwouldbetofirstcomputefrequencyand Forthecaseoftop-k frequentpatternminingalgorithms,
utility of each possible itemset and then find out the SFU several algorithms have been proposed. Most of the algo-
itemsets, which is very computationally expensive. rithmsinthiscategoryfollowsomewelldefinedsearchstrat-
Tothebestofourknowledgetherehasbeennoworkdone egy to find top-k patterns with out missing any result pat-
for mining this kind of pattern. However, application of tern. In general they maintain a result set that is improved
existing methods for high frequent itemsets mining or high in each step of the algorithm until there is a guarantee of
utilityitemsetsminingisnotstraightforward. We,therefore not finding any pattern with better frequency. The compo-
inthispaperstudySFUminingandpresentaframeworkto nentsofsuchalgorithmsaretheirsearchdatastructureand
discover SFU itemsets. To address the efficiency issue, we searchstrategies. Wealsomodeloursolutionintheformof
giveasetofpruningrulesusingutilityestimatesandpropose apatternsearchoverasearchdatastructurecalledUP-tree
a novel algorithm in the paper. The major contributions of and find skyline candidates.
this work are summarized as follows: The work for high utility-frequent itemset mining finds
patternsfromthedatabasethathavetheirsupportfrequency
1. Anovelpattern,calledSFUpatternisdefinedthatwill
of transaction with threshold utility higher than the user
satisfy the requirement of users who are interested in
defined frequency parameter. The authors in [12, 8] pro-
both frequent as well high utility patterns. A frame-
pose a concept of quasi-utility-frequency which is upward
work for mining SFU pattern is proposed.
closedwithrespecttothelatticeofallitemsets. Theygivea
top-downtwo-phasealgorithmwherequasi-utility-frequency
2. ProblemofminingSFUpatternsisformalizedasapat-
itemsetcandidatesaregeneratedinthefirstphaseandthen
tern search problem and an efficient algorithm called
candidates are verified finally in second phase to generate
SKYMINE is proposed.
utility-frequent itemset. However, this work also motivates
3. Synthetic as well as real datasets are used in experi- the use of both frequency and utility dimension for item-
ments to demonstrate the performance of SKYMINE set mining and restricts the transactions to be counted in
algorithm. Two heuristics effective for frequent and for support value on the basis of utility value of an itemset
high-utility itemset mining scenarios are also studied. X, but this can not be applied to determine skyline item-
Theexperimentalresultsshowthatourproposedalgo- sets introduced by us. We present a new type of pattern
rithm efficiently determines the correct and complete thatmaximizesboththedimensions,namelyutilityandfre-
SFU. quency, to generate non-dominating itemsets.
2. RELATEDWORK 3. BACKGROUND
Frequentitemsetminingisanareathathasattractedsev- Wegivesomedefinitionsanddefinetheproblemofutility-
eralresearchers’attentionandmanypapersonthetopichas frequency itemset mining formally in this section.
been published over the last decade. Initial algorithms for
3.1 UP-Tree
frequent itemset mining such as Apriori were based on the
downwardclosureproperty(alsocalledastheAprioriprop- AUP-Tree(UtilityPatternTree)isacompacttreestruc-
erty)[1]. Hanetal. proposeatechniqueforminingfrequent tureconsistingofaheadertable. Theheadertablecontains
Figure 1: UP-Tree for the example database in Table 1
alistofitemsinthetreefacilitatingtraversaloftheUP-Tree Definition 2. Utility of an itemset X in a transaction
(cid:80)
nodes [9, 10]. The header table, for each item contains the T ,X ⊆T ,isdenotedasu(X,T )anddefinedas u(i ,T ).
d d d ip∈X p d
item name, the estimated utility value and link to a node
intheUP-Treecontainingthatitem. Thelinkednodefrom Forexample,u({A,C},T 1 )=u(A,T 1 )+u(C,T 1 )=5+1=
the header table is basically a start node to the linked list 6.
containing same item nodes and is used to traverse same
Definition 3. Utility of an itemset X in D is denoted
item nodes in the UP-Tree. Each node n in the UP-Tree,
(cid:80)
as u(X) and defined as {u(X,T )|X ⊆T }.
except the root node (a special node that does not contain Td∈D d d
any item), has information about item name n.name, sup-
For example, u({A,C})=u({A,C},T ) + u({A,C},T ) +
portcountn.count,nodeutilityn.nu,parentnoden.parent, 1 2
u({A,C},T ) + u({A,C},T ) = 6+16+6+6=34.
same item node link n.hlink. A node utility n.nu gives the 3 6
estimate of the utility of an itemset comprising of items on Definition 4. Support count of an itemset X in D is
the path from the node to the root node. Similarly, the denoted as f(X) and defined as the number of transactions
valueofsupportcountatanoden,i.e.,n.count,definesthe T in D containing X, i.e., f(X)=|{T ∈D|X ⊆T }|.
d d d
supportcountofanitemsetcomprisingofitemsonthepath
from that node to the root node [9]. The UP-Tree for the For example, f({A,C})=4.
example database in Table 1 is shown in Figure 1. Definition 5. Let Xand Y be two itemsets. Itemset X
3.2 Preliminary is said to be dominating itemset Y in D, denoted by X (cid:31) D
Y or (f(X),u(X)) (cid:31) (f(Y),u(Y)), iff f(X) ≥ f(Y) and
Given a finite set of items I = {i ,i ,...,i }, an itemset
1 2 m u(X)>u(Y), or, f(X)>f(Y) and u(X)≥u(Y).
X isasetofkdistinctitems{i ,i ,...,i },wherei ∈I,1≤
1 2 k j
j ≤ k, and k is the length X. Each transaction T in the ForourexampledatabaseD,{A,C}(cid:31) {A}becauseu({A,C})
d D
database of transactions D ={T ,T ,...,T }, is an itemset > u({A}) and f({A,C})=f({A}).
1 2 n
and has associated with it a unique transaction identifier Problem Statement. Given a transaction database D,
d. Each item i in a transaction T is also associated with mining utility-frequency skyline itemsets PS from a trans-
p d
a quantity q(i ,T ), i.e., sold (purchased) quantity of i in action database D is equivalent to discovering all itemsets
p d p
T . Each item i ∈I has a unit profit value pr(i ) which a X fromD,whicharenotdominatedbyanyitemsetY inD,
d p p
retailer is assumed to earn by selling a unit of item i . i.e., ∀X ∈PS (cid:54)∃Y s.t. Y (cid:31) X.
p D
For our example, itemsets {C}, {A,C}, {A,C,D} and
Definition 1. Item transaction utility of an item i in {B,C,D,E} are utility-frequency skyline itemsets.
p
a transaction T , denoted by u(i ,T ) is defined as the total
profitearnedthr d oughitemi intr p ans d actionT ,i.e.,u(i ,T )= Definition 6. Given a database D and an index param-
p d p d
pr(i )×q(i ,T ). eter j, the function umin(j) returns the maximum utility
p p d
value from utilities of itemsets having their support count
For our example, u(A,T 1 )=5×1=5. greater than j, i.e. umin(j)=max X {u(X)|f(X)>j}.
Definition 7. An itemset X with support count f(X)= will be explained later in the section. After adding PFU
j isacandidatefrequent-utilityitemsetifitsutilityisgreater itemset at index i, the list L is maintained in the following
than umin(j). way: 1) We check umin(j) values at lower indexes than i
and the umin(j) at index j, 0 ≤ j ≤ i < |D|, is updated
For the example, umin(4)=14, because {C} is the only if umin(j) is smaller than the lb utility value of the added
itemset having its frequency greater than 4. The utility PFU itemset 2) The PFU patterns at index i or lower than
value of {C} is 14. The itemset {A,C} is a candidate iareremovediftheydominatedbytheaddedPFUitemset.
frequent-utility itemset as its support count is 4 and the A PFU itemset is said to be dominated if there exists an-
utility value is 34. otherPFUitemsetinthelistwithhighersupportvalueand
The goal of utility-frequent itemset mining is equivalent higherlbutilityvalue. Thealgorithmkeepsonsearchingfor
todiscoveryofumin(j)andcandidateitemsetswithhighest more PFU patterns until no pattern is found by the search
utility value for each j, 1≤j ≤|D|. strategy.
After giving the problem definition, we now introduce
4.2 ConstructionofUP-Tree
properties as introduced in earlier works [9].
The process of creating a UP-tree is similar to previous
Definition 8. Transaction utility of a transaction T d is approaches [9] with only being different in terms of deter-
denoted as TU(T d ) and defined as u(T d ,T d ). miningunpromisingitemswhenapplyingDiscardingGlobal
Node Utilities (DGN) rule. The tree can be created in two
For our example, transaction utilities of each transaction is
database scans. The transaction utility and TWU of each
given in the column labeled TU of the Table 1.
item is computed in the first scan. The items are the in-
Definition 9. Transaction-weightedutilityofanitemset serted into the header table in the non-increasing order of
their TWUs. Second database scan is used to insert the
X is the sum of the transaction utilities of all the transac-
transactionsintheUP-tree. Eachtransactionisfirstfiltered
tions containing X, which is denoted as TWU(X) and de-
(cid:80) outbyremovingunpromisingitemsandthenreorganizedus-
fined as TU(T ).
X⊆Td∧Td∈D d ingtheitemsTWUs. Thereorganizedtransaction(RTU)is
The transaction weighted utility of {A,C} is 99. then inserted into the UP tree. A reorganized transaction
T = {i ,i ,...,i } is inserted into the UP-tree using the
d 1 2 m
Definition 10. Givenapartiallycomputedsetoffrequency- function Insert Reorganized Transaction (N,i x ) as given in
utilityskylineitemsetsCPS,anitemsetX iscalledapoten- [9]. The function is performed as follows: each item i x of
tial frequency-utility skyline itemset (PFU) if (cid:54)∃Y ∈CPS, transaction from begining to end is matched with the item
s.t. (f(Y),u(Y))(cid:31) D (f(X),TWU(X)). of node N of tree starting from the root. In case item i x
matches, node utility and support count is updated by the
Thetransaction-weighteddownwardclosureisdenotedas prefixitemsetutilityvalueandone,respectively. Ifnonode
(TWDC) and defined as follows: for any itemset X which matches with the item i , a new node is created with node
x
is not a PFU, any superset of X is not a frequent-utility utilityvaluesetequaltotransaction-prefixutilityvalueand
skyline itemset. In case X is not marked PFU, then every support to one.
supersetitemsetofX willbedominatedbysomeelementin
4.3 GeneratingPFUsfromtheUP-Tree
CPS.
The algorithm uses a list of umin(j) values for its work-
4. MININGSKYLINEITEMSETS ing. Aumin(j)value,asdefinedearlier,denotesthelargest
utilityvalueofanyitemsetofsupportcountgreaterthanj.
In this section, we first present a basic algorithm named
These values are then revised as and when new PFUs are
SKYMINE for finding skyline frequent-utility (SFU) item-
added to the list L according to the process defined earlier.
sets. ThealgorithmusesUP-treeforitsworking. We,then,
The method of determining a PFU itemset is based on the
presentacoupleofheuristicstoimprovetheperformanceof
following lemma.
SKYMINE algorithm.
LetU =<umin(1),umin(2),....,umin(|D|)>bealistof
4.1 SKYMINEApproach umin values. For any itemset X with support count value
k,ifu(X)<umin(k)thenX isnotaSFU,elseX isaPFU
Thereiscurrentlynomethodproposedintheliteraturefor
.
miningSFUitemsets. TheSKYMINEapproachisbasically
This is due to the reason of itemset X being dominated
consisted of two phases: i) generation of potential skyline
by an itemset in the list L, according to the definition of
itemsets(PFU)usingUP-treeand,ii)identificationofSFUs
dominance and computation of umin() values.
from PFUs.
Similar to other top-k frequent patterns mining methods Definition 11. (Optimal umin-thresholds U∗) Let R be
[11], we follow a general process for mining PFU itemsets thecompletesetofSFUsinDandumin-thresholdU∗=(umin∗(0),
in the first phase of SKYMINE approach. Initially, a list umin∗(1),..., umin∗(|D|)) is the set of umin() values de-
L is created to store PFU itemsets ordered by their sup- rived from R. U∗ is called the optimal umin-threshold if
port counts. The utility threshold is set to 0 at each index theredoesnotexistanyitemsetX ∈D suchthatu(X,D)>
j in the list, i.e., umin(j) = 0, 0 < j < |D|. PFU pat- umin∗(f(X)).
terns are searched from the database using a well defined
search strategy. When a PFU pattern of a specific support Afterinitialassignmentofumin-thresholdto0(umin(j)=
count, say i, is found in the search process, it is added to 0,|D|≥j ≥=0),thealgorithmsperformsUP-Growthsearch
thelistLatindexi. Weassociatealower-bound(lb)anda process to generate PFUs. During phase-1 of the algorithm
upper-bound (ub) utility values with a PFU itemset which anexactutilityofanitemsetisnotknowntodecidewhether
Algorithm 1 SKYMINEX() The approach can be described as follows: for any newly
1: if (TWU(X) ≥ umin(f(X)) and ub(X) ≥ umin(f(X)) mineditemsetX usingpatterngrowthsearchstrategy,ifits
then ubandTWU arehigherthanumin(f(X)),thenlbofX can
2: Add X to L[f(X)] beusedtoupdatethelistLandumin-thresholdsU asgiven
3: Remove all itemsets Y at L[f(X)] s.t. ub(Y)<lb(X) in 1.
4: umin(f(X)) = max {lb(Y)}
Y∈L[f(X)] 4.4 IdentifyingSFUsfromPFUs
5: for j=f(X) downto 1 do
6: if umin(j)<lb(X) then AftergeneratingPFUslistLinthe1stphaseofthealgo-
7: umin(j)= lb(X) rithm, SFUs are identified by computing the exact utilities
8: Remove itemsets Y ∈L[j], s.t. ub(Y)≤lb(X) of PFUs. To compute exact utilities, the database D is
9: end if scanned once more. The list L is then processed from the
10: end for end to the begining and a parameter called maxU is used
11: end if to keep the current largest utility value seen by the algo-
rithm. An itemset with lower utility value than the maxU
is removed while scanning the list.
the itemset is a PFU and to update the umin(j) value.
Thus, for an itemset X we use its ub value to determine 5. HEURISTICS
whether the itemset is a PFU and use its lb value to up- Inthissection,weintroduceacoupleofheuristicstofur-
date umin(j) value, respectively. The lb and ub values are ther improve the performance of SKYMINE algorithm.
defined as follows
5.1 Pre-processingofSingletonandPairItem-
Definition 12. Thelowerbound(lb)utilityofanitemset sets(PSP)
X ={a ,a ,...,a } is defined as
1 2 m TheSKYMINEapproachstartswithuminthresholdval-
(cid:32) m uesof0,whichresultsintocreationoffullUP-Tree. Starting
(cid:88) withahigheruminthresholdvaluesmayresultintopruning
lb(X)=max (u (a )−mau(a )
D i i
of some of the nodes of UP-tree. Similar to previous work
i=1 (1)
m (cid:33) done for association rule mining [1], we propose a heuristic
∗(f(a )−f(X)), (cid:88) f(X)∗miu(a ) called pre-processing of singleton and pairs (PSP). Dur-
i i
ing the first scan of the database, utility of each single and
1
pairitemsetisevaluated. Thesesingletonandpairsarethen
Definition 13. The upper bound (ub) utility of an item- insertedintothelistLonebyoneandonlydominatingitem-
set X ={a ,a ,...,a } is defined as sets remain in the list at the end. The umin thresholds are
1 2 m
also updated according to the process described earlier.
(cid:32) m
lb(X)=min (cid:88) (u (a )−miu(a ) 5.2 Raisingumin(.)usingNodeutilities(RU)
D i i
i=1 (2) ThenextproposedstrategyiscalledRU inwhichweadd
m (cid:33) itemsets described by nodes in the UP-Tree. This heuris-
(cid:88)
∗(f(a i )−f(X)), f(X)∗mau(a i ) tic is applied using the nodes of UP-Tree constructed from
1 the database D (not a local UP-Tree). Earlier works on
UP-Tree [9] show that a node represents an itemset X con-
mau(a) and miu(a) are the maximum item utility and
sisting of items on nodes at the path from the node to the
minimum item utility of an item a in database D, respec-
root node as well as the RTU value of the node is an lb
tively. The miu(a) of an item a is the value u(a,t),t ∈ D
value, i.e., RTU(X) ≤ u(X). With these results, we can
such that (cid:54)∃t(cid:48) ∈D and u(a,t(cid:48))<u(a,t). Similarly, mau(a)
use the node utilities and node support count to increase
of an item a is defined as the value u(a,t),t∈D such that
the umin(.) threshold values. Increase in node utility value
(cid:54)∃t(cid:48) ∈D and u(a,t(cid:48))>u(a,t).
may help in pruning non-candidate items early and hence
LetS =<X ,X ,....,X >beasetofpartiallycomputed
1 2 n increase the performance of the algorithm.
PFU itemsets and U is the list of umin threshold values
S
derivedusinglbvaluesofX s. ForanyitemsetY,ifub(Y)<
i 6. EXPERIMENTS
U [f(Y)], Y is not a SFU.
S
The SKYMINE algorithm 1 uses the UP-Growth process Datasets: We have conducted extensive experiments to
to generate a candidate itemsets X. Each candidate item- evaluate the proposed methods. All the experiments were
setX aftergenerationischeckedwhetheritsTWU valueis performedonacomputerwithIntelCore-i3CPU2.10GHz
higher than the current umin(f(X)) value. If TWU(X)< and 4.00 GB RAM. The operating system is Ubuntu11.04.
umin(f(X)), X and all its supersets are not SFU itemsets. AllthealgorithmsareimplementedinJavaonEclipse3.5.2
Otherwise,ub(X)iscomparedwithumin(f(X))value. X is platform with JDK 1.6.0 24. For performing experiments,
addedtothelistLifub(X)ishigher. AfteraddingX inL, we used different types of real world datasets, descriptions
the umin thresholds are revised using the lb value of X. X of which are given in Table 3.
willremaininthelistLforconsiderationinthesecondphase ThedatasetmushroomwasobtainedfromtheFIMIRepos-
ofalgorithmiftheredoesnotexistanyitemsetY ∈D such itory. Itisdensedatasetwithabout8000transactionseach
that lb(Y)>ub(X) and f(Y)≥f(X). The algorithm con- ofwhichhasabout23items. ThedatasetFoodmart wasac-
tinues searching for more PFUs until no candidate is found quiredfromMicrosoftfoodmart2000database. Thisdataset
by UP-Growth. is sparse in nature with around 4000 transactions of length
Table 4: Experiment Results
Datasets
Approach Parameters
Mushroom Retail-store Foodmart
#Candidates 1250367 36911 1629
SKY
base #Total-Time 217486 sec 26236 1.3 sec.
#Candidates 5213 135622215 1174141
SKY
prun #Total-Time 117 sec 33036 1.4 sec.
sparse datasets.
Table 3: Characteristics of Datasets
8. REFERENCES
Dataset #T Avg.length #Items Type
x
Mushroom 8,124 23.0 119 Dense
Foodmart 227 17.88 1559 Sparse
[1] Rakesh Agrawal and Ramakrishnan Srikant. Fast
Retail Store 88,000 10.3 16469 Sparse
algorithms for mining association rules in large
databases. In 20th VLDB, pages 487–499, 1994.
[2] Chowdhury Farhan Ahmed, Syed Khairuzzaman
4 on the average. The third dataset we used for our ex-
Tanbeer, Byeong-Soo Jeong, and Young-Koo Lee.
perimentisRetailthatweobtainedfromFIMIrepositories.
Efficient tree structures for high utility pattern mining
It is also a sparse dataset with around 88000 transaction
in incremental databases. IEEE TKDE,
with average transaction size of 10. The detailed descrip-
21(12):1708–1721, 2009.
tion of these datasets are given in Table 3. The quanti-
[3] Raymond Chan, Qiang Yang, and Yi-Dong Shen.
ties of items are generated randomly with uniform distri-
Mining high utility itemsets. In IEEE ICDM 2003,
bution in the range of 1-6 in the case of mushroom and
pages 19–26, Nov 2003.
Retail datasets. The utility value for items is generated us-
ing log-normal distribution. The Foodmart dataset already [4] Alva Erwin, RajP. Gopalan, and N.R. Achuthan.
containsquantityandutilityvalues. Theproposedstrategy Efficient mining of high utility itemsets from large
SKY is evaluated using three different variants, SKY , datasets. In Advances in Knowledge Discovery and
base
SKY . SKY is the the version of the algorithm that Data Mining, volume 5012, pages 554–561, 2008.
prun base
does not use any sort of pre-computation for its working. [5] Jiawei Han, Jian Pei, and Yiwen Yin. Mining frequent
On the other hand, SKY algorithm use pre-processing patterns without candidate generation. In ACM
prun
and utility-raising techniques. SIGMOD, pages 1–12, 2000.
TheperformanceresultsofalgorithmsSKY andSKY [6] Hua-Fu Li, Hsin-Yun Huang, Yi-Cheng Chen, Yu-Jiun
base prun
aregiveninTable4. ItcanbeseenthatSKY algorithm Liu, and Suh-Yin Lee. Fast and memory efficient
base
performsmuchbetterthananaiveapproachthatwouldre- mining of high utility itemsets in data streams. In
quiretogeneratesupportandutilityvalueofeverypossible IEEE ICDM, pages 881–886, 2008.
combination of items. The use of pattern growth paradigm [7] Ying Liu, Wei-keng Liao, and Alok Choudhary. A fast
along with use of UP-growth data structure and tight esti- high utility itemsets mining algorithm. In 1st
mates really help to prune the search space. It can also be International Workshop on Utility-based Data Mining,
observedthatSKY base outperformsSKY prun inthecaseof pages 90–99, 2005.
sparsedatasets,i.e. Retail-storeandFoodmart. Itisdueto [8] Vid Podpecan, Nada Lavrac, and Igor Kononenko. A
the reason of generating a large number of candidate item- fast algorithm for mining utility-frequent itemsets.
setsaspairsandtree-nodeitemsetsfromsparsedatasets,as CONSTRAINT-BASED MINING AND LEARNING,
thenumberofitemsinsparsedatasetandnodesinUP-tree page 9, 2007.
are very large. On the other hand, for dense datasets like [9] Vincent S. Tseng, Cheng-Wei Wu, Bai-En Shie, and
Mushroom where the number of different items is small in Philip S. Yu. Up-growth: An efficient algorithm for
number, the SKY p run approach becomes very effective. high utility itemset mining. In 16th ACM SIGKDD,
pages 253–262, 2010.
7. CONCLUSION [10] V.S. Tseng, Bai-En Shie, Cheng-Wei Wu, and P.S. Yu.
Weintroduceanewpatterncalledfrequent-utilityskyline Efficient algorithms for mining high utility itemsets
pattern. This pattern is interesting as it relieves the user from transactional databases. IEEE TKDE,
in terms of specifying different threshold parameters and 25(8):1772–1786, Aug 2013.
returnpatternsthatarerelevantbothintermsoffrequency [11] Cheng Wei Wu, Bai-En Shie, Vincent S. Tseng, and
or utility. We have formalized the problem as a pattern Philip S. Yu. Mining top-k high utility itemsets. In
search problem and use an existing data structure called 18th ACM SIGKDD, KDD ’12, pages 78–86, 2012.
UP-tree for its working. Through our experimental study, [12] Jieh-Shan Yeh, Yu-Chiang Li, and Chin-Chen Chang.
wehavestudiedtheimpactofacoupleofheuristicseffective Two-phase algorithms for a novel utility-frequent
in the context of frequent-itemset mining and high-utility mining model. In International Conference on
itemsetmining,andobservethattheystillworkgoodforthe Emerging Technologies in Knowledge Discovery and
caseofdensedatasetslikemushroombutperformpoorlyfor Data Mining, pages 433–444, 2007.
